Appendix A: Ethics Compliance

Software Testing With Users Compliance Form – UG & PGT Projects*
School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex

This form should be used in conjunction with the document entitled “Ethical Review
Guidance for Student Projects”.
Prior to conducting your project, you and your supervisor must discuss the ethical
implications of your project. If your proposed project complies with all of the points in this
form, then may use this form.
If you use this form, you must also prepare either (a) an information sheet and a
consent for your participant to sign, or (b) prepare an Introduction and Debriding Script to
read to your participant before the test (see appendix below). These must be approved by
you supervisor.
Include the signed copy of this form with your final project report/dissertation.
If your proposed project does not comply with all the points, you should refer back to the
“Research Ethics Guidance for UG and PGT Projects” document for further guidance.
________________________________________________________________________
1. Participants were not exposed to any risks greater than those encountered in their
normal working life.
You have a responsibility to protect participants from physical, mental and emotional
harm during the testing. The risk of harm must be no greater than in ordinary life. Areas
of potential risk that require ethical approval include, but are not limited to,
investigations that require participant mobility (e.g. walking, running, use of public
transport), unusual or repetitive activity or movement, physical hazards or discomfort,
emotional distress, use of sensory deprivation (e.g. ear plugs or blindfolds), sensitive
topics (e.g. sexual activity, drug use, political behaviour, ethnicity) or those which might
induce discomfort, stress or anxiety (e.g. violent video games), bright or flashing lights,
loud or disorienting noises, smell, taste, vibration, or force feedback.
2. The study materials are paper-based or comprises software running on standard
hardware.
Participants should not be exposed to any risks associated with the use of non-standard
equipment: anything other than pen-and-paper, standard PCs, mobile phones, and tablet
computers is considered non-standard.
3. All participants must explicitly state that they agreed to take part, and that their data
can be used in the project.
*

This form was originally developed by Professor Steven Brewster at the University of Glasgow, and modified by
Dr Judith Good for use at the University of Sussex with his permission.

Version 6.0

-1-

19/09/25

Participants cannot take part in the test without their knowledge or consent (i.e. no
covert observation). Covert observation, deception or withholding information are
deemed to be high risk and require ethical approval through the relevant F-REC.
If the results of the evaluation are likely to be used beyond the term of the project (for
example, the software is to be deployed, the data is to be published or there are future
secondary uses of the data), then it will be necessary to obtain signed consent from each
participant. Otherwise, verbal consent is sufficient, and should be explicitly requested in
the introductory script (see Appendix 1).
4. No incentives will be offered to the participants.
The payment of participants must not be used to induce them to risk harm beyond that
which they risk without payment in their normal lifestyle. People volunteering to
participate may be compensated financially e.g. for reasonable travel expenses.
Payments made to individuals must not be so large as to induce individuals to risk harm
beyond that which they would usually undertake.
5. No information about the evaluation or materials is intentionally withheld from the
participants.
Withholding information from participants or misleading them is unacceptable without
justifiable reasons for doing so. Any projects requiring deception (for example, only
telling participants of the true purpose of the study afterwards so as not to influence their
behaviour) are deemed high risk and require approval from the relevant F-REC.
6. No participant is under the age of 18.
Any studies involving children or young people are deemed to be high risk and require
ethical approval through the relevant F-REC.
7. No participant has a disability or impairment that may have limited their understanding
or communication or capacity to consent.
Projects involving participants with disabilities are deemed to be high risk and require
ethical approval from the relevant F-REC.
8. Neither I nor my supervisor are in a position of authority or influence over any of the
participants.
A position of authority or influence over any participant must not be allowed to
pressurise participants to take part in, or remain in, any study.
9. All participants will be informed that they can withdraw at any time.
All participants have the right to withdraw at any time during the investigation. They
should be told this in the introductory script (see Appendix 1).
10. All participants will be informed of my contact details, and the contact details of my
supervisor.
All participants must be able to contact the investigator and/or the supervisor after the
investigation. They should be given contact details for both student and supervisor as
part of the debriefing.
Version 6.0

-2-

19/09/25

11. The evaluation will be described in detail with all of the participants at the beginning of
the session, and participants will be fully debriefed at the end of the session. All
participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions at both the beginning and
end of the session.
Participants must be provided with sufficient information prior to starting the session,
and in the debriefing, to enable them to understand the nature of the investigation.
12. All the data collected from the participants will be stored securely, and in an
anonymous form.
All participant data (hard-copy and soft-copy) should be stored securely (i.e. locked
filing cabinets for hard copy, password protected computer for electronic data), and in
an anonymised form.
Project title: AI-Powered Dynamic Narrative System for RPGs
Student’s Name: Duncan Law
Student’s Registration Number: 281967
Student’s Signature:

Date: 09/11/2025
Supervisor’s Name: ____Dr Daniel Creed________________________________________
I have read and authorised either (a) the participant information sheet and consent form or
(b) the Introduction and Debrief scripts.
Supervisor’s Initials: ____DC_______

Supervisor’s Signature: _____
______________________________________________
Date:
_______09/11/2025___________________________________________________________

Software Testing With Users Compliance Form
Appendix 1: Introduction and Debriefing Scripts

Version 6.0

-3-

19/09/25

If you intend to obtain verbal consent from your participants, you need to create an
introduction script, to read out at the start of the study, and a debriefing script, to read out
at the end of the study. You should get your supervisor’s approval for your introduction
and debriefing scripts before commencing your study. NB: When submitting the signed
Software Testing With Users Compliance form include your Introduction and
Debriefing script.

Introduction Script
The introduction script must:
• state the general aim of the study
• explain why you need the involvement of other people
• describe what will happen in the study
• describe what data will be collected
• reassure the participant that any data collected will be stored securely, and in an
anonymous format
• explain what interaction the participant may have with you during the study
• reassure the participant that this is not a test of ability
• state that the participant may withdraw at any time
• seek explicit consent
• allow the participant to ask questions
An example introductory script (italics indicate required information, some of which will
be specific to your project):
Web Interface Investigation
Final Year Project, 2020-21
Jane Student
The aim of this study is to investigate the [state the general aim of the experiment – e.g.,
suitability of a new website]. We cannot tell how good this [. . . . ] is unless we ask those people
who are likely to be using it, which is why we need to run studies like these [explain why you
need the involvement of other people]. I will give you some time to [describe the tasks in
involved in general terms], before asking you to answer some questions [describe kinds of
questions].
I will be observing you while you perform the tasks [describe what data will be collected]. If you
have any questions, please ask me, and please let me know when you are finished [explain
what interaction the participant may have with you during the study].
I will ask you some questions at the end of the study [describe what will happen in the study].
Please remember that it is the system, not you, that is being evaluated [reassure the participant
that this is not a test of ability].
You are welcome to withdraw from the study at any time [state that the participant may withdraw
at any time]. Please be assured that any data collected will be stored securely and in an
anonymous form [describe how the data will be anonymised and stored].

Version 6.0

-4-

19/09/25

Do you agree to take part in this evaluation? [seek explicit consent]. Do you have any questions
before we start? [allow the participant to ask questions].

Debriefing Script
The debriefing script that is used at the end of the study must:
• restate the main aim of the experiment
• if applicable, explain any other, related aims of the experiment, and any particular
data collected
• allow the participant to make comments or ask questions
• give contact details for the student and supervisor
• thank the participant
An example debriefing script (italics indicate required information, some of which will be
specific to your project):
Web Interface Investigation
Final Year Project, 2020-21
Jane Student
The main aim of the experiment was to investigate the suitability of this website [restate the
main aim of the experiment]. In particular, I was looking to see whether you made use of the site
map, and whether any of the links on the website seemed to be confusing. I wanted to know
how easy the pages were to navigate [if applicable, explain any other, related aims of the
experiment, and any particular data collected].
Do you have any comments or questions about the experiment? [allow the
participant to make comments or ask questions]. Here are my contact details, and those of my
supervisor, and please let us know if you have any further questions about this study [give
contact details of student and supervisor to participant]. Thank you for your help [thank the
participant].

Version 6.0

-5-

19/09/25

Appendix B: Project Proposal
G5038: Final Year Project - Week 3 Project Proposal
Title: Al-Powered Dynamic Narrative System for Role-Playing Games (RPGs)
Candidate Number: 281967

Supervisor: Dan Creed

Date: 09 October 2025

University of Sussex
Engineering & Informatics

1. Aims and Objectives
*1.1 Aims Overarching
Aim: To investigate how far a bespoke, Al-driven 2D RPG narrative system can effectively generate a
coherent, long-horizon thematic allegory, and to critically evaluate its architectural trade-offs against largescale, theoretical “world model” approaches. This aim is built on three pillars:
e Pillar 1: Technical Development. To develop an Al-driven 2D RPG narrative system. This involves
designing and implementing a playable 2D RPG featuring dynamically generated storylines and NPC
dialogue, where “dynamically” refers to the real-time generation of narrative content based on game
state and player choice, rather than selecting from pre-written scripts. The focus is on enabling
emergent, non-linear narratives while addressing long-horizon coherence.
e Pillar 2: Thematic Execution. To craft a thematic allegory of university experiences. This involves
creating a game world that allegorically explores a conflict between “positive energy” ideology and
entropic decay, using core concepts like “The Void Entropy” and the “Positive Energy Curse” to guide
Al narrative generation. This aim seeks to translate lived experiences into a compelling, darkly
satirical game narrative.
e Pillar 3: Critical Analysis. To produce a comprehensive comparative analysis report. This involves
authoring a critical report comparing this project’s bespoke AI narrative methodology with the
described approaches of large-scale “world models” (e.g., Google Genie), emphasising architectural
trade-offs, controllability, and practical contributions.

*1.2 Objectives

1. To build a Foundational 2D RPG framework in Godot 4.6.1
2. To implement an LLM integration & runtime pipeline
Implement a request/response pipeline that translates game state > structured prompt > LLM reply
— in-game events/NPC lines. The initial provider will be Google Gemini, with a Settings page allowing
users to supply their own API key and optionally select OpenRouter as an alternative provider. This
pipeline will prioritise efficient token usage and responsive narrative generation.
3. To design and implement a multi-layer context management system for narrative coherence.
e Static Context (“world bible” of immutable lore and themes)
e Short-Term Context (most recent scene/dialogue)
e Long-Term Memory (periodic Al summaries of key plot points/decisions stored for future
prompts). A “notes/to-do list” mechanism will record emergent facts to ensure consistency
across generations, with a focus on minimising narrative drift.

4. To Author the seed narrative and world setting
Provide initial backstories and the philosophical conflict for Glorious Deliverance Agency 1 (GDA1),
including Void Entropy and the Positive Energy Curse as the canonical seeds that guide generation,
ensuring a strong thematic foundation for the AI.
5. To conduct a deep comparative analysis and system evaluation.
a) System Performance Evaluation: Collect development artefacts and generation samples
throughout the project to inform a critical analysis of this bespoke pipeline. Planned
measurements include: ¢ Narrative consistency: Sample Al-generated passages and annotating
contradictions vs. world rules (lower is better).
e Player experience: Feedback on immersion, control, consistency, and pacing.
e Latency & cost: Average response time per turn and API spend.
e Ablations: Compare with/without the notes/summarisation mechanism; contrast cloud
vs. local model performance.
b) Conceptual Architectural Comparison: Contrast this project’s narrative-first architecture
with the publicly described concepts of “world-model” systems like Google Genie. This analysis
will focus on theoretical differences in scope, controllability, and practical feasibility for a
narrative-focused project, rather than direct performance benchmarking.
*Extensions (time-permitting)
e Architectural documentation website (static site) to visualise data flow, modules, and context logic
for assessors.
e Researching fast Al models (e.g., 8 billion parameters) with large context windows for efficient and
responsive narrative generation, balancing performance with narrative complexity.
2. Background and Rationale
The project formalises a long-standing personal reflection into an allegorical, Al-native game. This means
the Large Language Model (LLM) is not merely a tool for content generation but is central to the game’s core
experience, driving emergent narratives and dynamic NPC interactions. Structurally, play proceeds through
looping missions where outward “success” paradoxically accelerates decline, producing a deliberately
endless, bleakly comic arc consistent with the world’s rules. This establishes a fertile testbed for LLM-driven
story generation to express irony, reversals, and psychological pressure.
A planned dimension of the written report is to contrast this system with world-model approaches such as
Google Genie, which aim to generate entire interactive environments consistent with physics, an aspiration
beyond the scope of this 2D narrative-first project. This comparison frames the practical trade-offs between
bespoke pipelines and end-to-end world models, forming a significant part ofthe critical analysis.
3. Relevance to Degree Course
This project serves as the capstone for the BSc Digital Media and Games Computing degree, synthesising the
technical and critical skills developed throughout the course. The technical core 2D game in Godot with a
bespoke AI narrative system builds on programming fundamentals and the practical experience gained from
my successful Year 2 Software Engineering project. The integration of a Large Language Model (LLM) is a
direct continuation of my proactive work with Al, evidenced by winning the “Most Creative Award” in the
Year 1 Machine Challenge and implementing the Google Gemini API during a summer internship.
Furthermore, the project’s robust management and documentation structure applies key principles of
architecture and version control learned from leading my Year 2 team to success. This project is the logical
next step, applying these proven skills ina more complex and creative context.

2

4. Project Plan and Timeline
The project is structured into four main phases, spanning the Autumn and Spring terms:
Phase 1: Foundation and Prototyping (Autumn Term: Weeks 1-5) Focuses on establishing the project’s
technical groundwork, including research, planning, and developing the core 2D RPG framework.
Phase 2: Core AI Implementation and Reporting (Autumn Term: Weeks 6-9)
This phase tackles the central technical challenge of integrating the LLM and developing the multilayered context management system. It culminates with the submission of the Interim Report.
Phase 3: Narrative Integration and System Refinement (Autumn Term: Weeks 10-12 &S
Involves authoring the seed narrative, integrating it with the AI system, and conducting extensive
testing and iteration to ensure narrative coherence and player engagement. The game build is
expected to be largely complete by the end of January, allowing for focused report writing.
Phase 4: Extensions, Finalisation, and Dissertation (Spring Term) Dedicated to implementing selected
extension objectives, finalising the project deliverables, and writing the comprehensive final report
and critical analysis, which constitutes 80% of the overall project mark.
5. Expected Deliverables ¢ Playable Godot 4.6.1 prototype demonstrating end-to-end AI-driven dialogue and
story progression with multi-layer context.
e Source code repository with documentation and architecture diagrams (plus optional static
documentation website).
e Final dissertation including the critical comparison with world-model approaches like Genie.
e Recorded gameplay video showcasing key Al-driven narrative moments for presentation and
demonstration.

Appendix C: Game Design Document
G5038: Final Year Project - Game Design Document
Game Title: Glorious Deliverance Agency 1

University of Sussex

Date: 26 October 2025

Engineering & Informatics
Creative Statement:

All characters, events, and religious metaphors in this game are purely fictional and intended for satirical
purposes. There is no intention to allude to any real-life individuals, groups, or beliefs.
1. Game Overview

1.1. Pitch An AJ native 2D role-playing game where you are a reluctant hero in a dysfunctional team, whose
attempts to save the world with “positive energy” only accelerate its destruction in a dark, toxic positivity.
1.2. Format and Platforms The game is designed for PC
platforms using the Godot 4.6.1 Engine, targeting players who
have access to desktop computing environments. The
technical foundation will support integration with various Al
language models to enable dynamic narrative generation,
which defines the core gameplay experience.
1.3. Genre and Theme The game blends RPG mechanics with
narrative-driven gameplay, wrapped in layers of dark comedy
and satire. At its thematic heart lies a critique of toxic positivity and modern hustle culture, exploring how
good intentions can spiral into catastrophic consequences. The narrative weaves together concepts of
entropy, determinism, and the psychological damage caused by forced optimism, all delivered through black
humour that encourages players to question the systems they participate in.
1.4. Graphical Perspective The visual presentation adopts a scene-based approach reminiscent of visual
novels and stage plays. The game screen features a prominent central view, with character sprites, dynamic
backgrounds, and interactive objects that create a theatrical experience. An AI director orchestrates both
the narrative delivery through dialogue boxes and the visual composition of each scene, creating a synthesis
where story and visuals respond dynamically to player choices.
1.5. Target Audience Primary: University students and young adults who can relate to the themes of
academic pressure, project frustrations, and the often absurd clash between idealism and reality.
Secondary: Players interested in experimental and Al-driven narratives, fans of dark humour and satirical
storytelling, and those intrigued by the technical implementation of LLMs in games.
1.6. Game Influences Technological: Google’s “Genie” AI world model, which inspired the core concept of
an Al-generated game world. The project also aims to be a critical reflection on such technology.
Literary: The story draws on satirical and absurdist traditions, with a narrative that subverts classic “hero’s
journey” tropes.
1.7. Player Objectives: Victory in the traditional sense does not exist in this game. Instead, players navigate
an endless, looping tragedy orchestrated by the Glorious Deliverance Agency. The experience focuses on:
e Influencing the Al-generated narrative as it unfolds

e Managing the tension between Reality and Positive Energy statistics while witnessing their impact
on the world’s stability
e Surviving the social and psychological challenges posed by dysfunctional teammates
e Ultimately uncovering the dark, ironic truth behind what the game calls the Positive Energy Curse

1.8. Distinctive Features The game’s most distinctive element is its Al-native narrative engine, where
core story beats, NPC dialogue, and player choices emerge dynamically through real-time generation by
language models such as Google Gemini, OpenRouter, or local Ollama instances. This creates genuinely
unique playthroughs where no two experiences follow identical paths.
Supporting this narrative foundation is an Al-driven visual scene system featuring a comprehensive
library of two-dimensional assets:
¢ Twenty environmental backgrounds establish locations
e Forty-eight character expression sprites provide emotional nuance across six main characters
¢ Twenty-nine symbolic gameplay objects add interactive elements
e Eight generic NPC archetypes allow the AI to populate scenes with supporting characters
The AI selects and combines these visual elements through structured directives to construct contextually

appropriate scenes for every narrative moment.
The Reality versus Positive Energy mechanic forms the game’s philosophical core, creating a unique
statistical system where traditionally positive actions directly accelerate the world’s decay, making players
complicit in the disaster they witness. The Prayer System functions as an ironic prompt engineering tool
where players input hopeful prayers that the AI transforms into disastrous outcomes.
Beyond its mechanical innovations, the game aspires to thematic
depth by functioning as a playable allegory. Every system and
narrative beat works together to offer a satirical critique of realworld social phenomena around toxic positivity, workplace
dysfunction, and the dangers of refusing to acknowledge difficult
truths.
2. Characters

2.1. Player Character: The Protagonist The protagonist embodies pragmatic realism,
reflecting anyone worn down by repeated disappointments and betrayals. At the story’s
beginning, they harbour deep mistrust toward divine intervention and blind faith,
preferring rational thinking over magical solutions. This worldview crumbles when Saint
Gloria deploys masterful psychological manipulation, convincing the protagonist that
their negativity causes all personal and interpersonal failures. Pushed to the edge of
mental breakdown, the protagonist desperately accepts Gloria’s salvation and adopts her
simplistic positive energy creed as a last resort to avoid harming others. This forced
conversion sets the stage for their tragic journey as reluctant believers who know better
but feel they have no choice.

2.2. Non-Player Characters: The Team The player’s teammates function not as traditional allies but as the
primary antagonists and obstacles. Each embodies a distinct, flawed ideology that systematically
undermines every mission.

Saint Gloria serves as the Guardian of the Greenhouse, a weaponised innocent

who has constructed a sterile bubble of love and tolerance around herself. She
perceives any dose of reality that might shatter this bubble as negative energy
requiring purification. While she believes her life has been blessed and
smooth, she has actually survived numerous personal tragedies by choosing
not to process them, instead embracing belief in the Positive Energy Law and
the Flying Spaghetti Monster as a cure-all defence mechanism. Her god is not
real but rather a personification of her denial. Gloria never attacks directly,
instead deploying moral blackmail through phrases like “your actions have
hurt me” to induce guilt and control. When confronted with concrete
problems, she pivots to criticising others’ negative emotional reactions,
derailing the original issue. She tolerates the weak who don’t challenge her
worldview, but cannot abide those who use logic to question it. She represents
refined selfishness that prioritises personal peace over confronting complex realities.
Sir Donkey is the Self-Proclaimed Hero, a bankrupt concept who lives as a
cosplayer trapped in an archaic epic. He believes striking heroic poses
automatically entitles him to glory and princesses, despite lacking any skills
required for genuine heroism. His entire worldview derives from clich’ed,
gender-stereotyped fantasy novels and web fiction, making him profoundly
positive in the most toxic way. He performs chivalry through flattery and
boasting, but remains utterly passive and responsibility-avoidant in practice.
His creative solutions invariably revolve around hero-saves-damsel tropes that
objectify women, and when challenged, Gloria insists others tolerate his views.
When his plans fail, he immediately shifts blame and frames himself as a
misunderstood hero held back by incompetent allies. He symbolises infantile
mentality steeped in outdated fantasies and incapable of facing real challenges.
ARK is the Diligent Destroyer, an Architect of the Black Box who zealously pursues order and planning.
However, his order merely wraps chaos in complex rules, leading to more
.
spectacular and thorough collapse. Coming from a chaotic background, he
developed pathological cravings for control and certainty, never questioning
his own plans but always questioning those who refused to obey them. He
issues commands online and holds meetings solely for others to rubberstamp his pre-made decisions in a sham democracy. He operates in isolation,
never syncing progress or explaining methods, thereby destroying team trust.
He pours immense energy into minor execution details while remaining
careless with crucial strategic planning and communication, demonstrating
tactical diligence paired with strategic laziness. He represents bureaucratic
thinking that worships procedure and authority while losing the capacity for communication and adaptation.
One is the Silent Witness, the Unwitting Accomplice who stands as the
only truly competent and principled person on the team. His kindness and
conflict-avoidant nature lead him to remain silent in toxic environments,

making him a witness to injustice and a source of moral torment for the
protagonist. As an old friend who built trust with the protagonist through
early trials, he proves loyal and reliable, yet suffers subtle ostracism from
other teammates due to his background or language. He practices passive
goodness, never actively harming anyone, but also never intervening when
others are harmed, fearing he will disrupt harmony. Gloria’s love and
tolerance never extend to him. He maintains public peace with claims of
being okay while privately expressing true pain and frustration to the
protagonist. He represents how silence from good people can become a
form of complicity within toxic systems.

Teacher Chan is the Soul-Soothing Singer, the Harbinger of Doom who serves as
high priestess of the God of Blinding Light. As a national-level idol singer, her
image radiates pure, white-robed compassion. Her gentle songs filled with lyrics
about letting go, forgiveness, and growth are not balms but curses. She genuinely
believes in her message, which makes her terrifying. Her concerts function as
massive rituals that dramatically amplify the Void Entropy, accelerating the
world’s end. She is not a spiritual guide but a world destroyer wearing the guise

of one.
3. Narrative and Story
3.1. Backstory and Premise The universe operates according to a fundamental law called Void Entropy,
where all things naturally and slowly decay toward chaos and eventual oblivion. This represents a peaceful,
albeit melancholic, fate. However, when scientists discovered this truth, humanity refused to accept it. A

global spiritual movement called the Flying Spaghetti Monster Gospel emerged, preaching a lie that the
universe’s decay could be reversed by broadcasting pure positive energy through the Law of Attraction.
The terrible truth is that this forced, manufactured positivity born from suppressing all negative emotion
serves as the ultimate catalyst for Void Entropy. Every prayer for miracles, every act of blind faith, every

instance of tolerating injustice for love’s sake accelerates the world’s natural demise by a factor of ten
thousand. The world is not dying naturally but being actively poisoned by hope itself.
3.2. In-Game Narrative and Game Loop The game operates on a cyclical, endlessly darkening loop with no
victory condition. The Glorious Deliverance Agency receives a hopeful, world-saving quest generated by the
Al. Players are forced to use the Prayer System, inputting positive words that act as prompts for the AI to
engineer disastrous scenarios. During mission attempts, teammates with their unique brands of
incompetence systematically sabotage every step through Al-generated actions and dialogue.
Missions fail in spirit but succeed on surface levels, with net results being massive increases in world Entropy.
These successful outcomes trigger mandatory events where Teacher Chan appears in holographic concerts,
singing soothing songs that brainwash the team into believing they accomplished good things. Players
receive Cognitive Dissonance debuffs. Brief Al-triggered honeymoon phases follow, where teammates act
unusually cooperative and kind, giving false hope before new missions begin, and the cycle repeats, plunging
the world into deeper despair.
The story has no end. The protagonist and team grow stronger in statistics, but their fate only darkens. They
meet new people only to lose them to the team’s folly, forever trapped with the GDA as they personally escort
the world to its doom.
4. Gameplay and Mechanics
4.1. Core AI Narrative and Gameplay Framework The game’s foundation rests on a flexible framework
where AI generates not just text but also populates mission scenes with unique parameters, objectives, and
constraints. The AI establishes scenarios with specific challenges, then generates choices based on player
skills, including Logic, Perception, Composure, and Empathy. The system includes deliberate sabotage
mechanics where successful skill checks by players often trigger catastrophic interruptions from teammates,
generated by AI based on character personas. For example, successfully calming a guard through Logic might
be immediately undone when Donkey loudly proclaims the party has come to rescue princesses from evil
dragons, resulting in arrests.
4.2. Resource Management: Reality versus Positive Energy This system replaces traditional health and
mana mechanics, forming the central mechanic that influences AI behaviour. Reality Score increases through
rational, logical, or pessimistic choices and successful Logic or Perception checks. High Reality scores unlock
dialogue options that see through team delusions and help resist Gloria’s mental attacks, but also cause
teammates to brand players as negative and target them more frequently.

Positive Energy Score increases through agreeing with teammates’ foolish plans, using positive words in the
Prayer System, and choosing love and tolerance options. This increases teammate friendliness, though their
help remains useless, and makes Empathy checks easier. However, every point of Positive Energy directly
increases the world’s Entropy Value, accelerating its destruction. Player positivity becomes a weapon
against the world itself.
4.3. The Prayer System This system functions as a direct interface for players to prompt them to engineer
their own doom. Before missions, a user interface appears where players must type prayers to the Flying
Spaghetti Monster. The more positive and hopeful the text about cooperation and mission success, the more
heavily the AI is instructed to generate ironic, disastrous outcomes that subvert those prayers. Players
actively write scripts for their own failures.
4.4. Teacher Chan’s Apocalypse Concert Mandatory cutscene events trigger after mission successes. Prerendered video of Teacher Chan plays with Al-generated lyrics appearing as subtitles. The lyrics consist of
generic, feel-good platitudes that reframe preceding disasters as triumphs of spirit. After concerts, players
are afflicted with Cognitive Dissonance debuffs that temporarily lower Logic and critical thinking skills, and
may force positive keywords into next prayers, ensuring downward spirals continue.
4.5, Gloria’s Intervention Event Special triggered events occur when player complaints or negative choices
reach certain thresholds. The game transitions to dedicated screens featuring Gloria’s portrait, where she
delivers monologues starting with lines about how player negativity has dragged her into the first emotional
low of her life. The AI generates the rest of the text, personally attacking recent player choices. These events
inflict massive emotional and statistical damage. To exit, players must click Continue, after which their only
available action is Pray, forcing them back into toxic positivity cycles.
4.6. The Diary System This system provides players’ only true outlet and serves as a key feature for
mitigating frustration. After each mission, players can open journals where the AI provides several options
for recording events. Entries might be factual, emotional, or sarcastic in tone. The diary does not affect main

plot outcomes but functions as a spiritual guide for players. Entries influence the protagonist’s internal
monologue and can unlock special, fantasy-only resistance scenes, such as dream sequences where players
beat up teammates, providing crucial emotional catharsis.
4.7. Al-Driven Visual Scene and Asset System This system bridges AIgenerated narratives with finite art asset sets through intelligent asset
selection and contextual arrangement. The AI will receive detailed asset
manifests as part of its system prompt, enabling the selection of appropriate
visual elements that match the narrative context. The AI will generate
structured scene directives specifying:
e Scene configuration: background type, atmospheric mood, and
lighting conditions
e Character composition: determining which characters appear with
which expressions
¢ Symbolic object placement: with contextualised names and descriptions
e¢ NPC casting: where generic archetypes appear as specific named characters
The asset libraries include:
¢ Twenty unds of environmental scenes organised by theme
¢ Forty-eight character sprites representing six main characters with eight expressions each

¢ Twenty-nine symbolic assets of gameplay objects organised into curated cycles
e Eight NPC archetypes as generic character types the AI can cast into specific roles « Over twenty-five
audio assets, including sound effects and background music
The system will support asset querying by tags and themes, allowing the AI to request dangerous outdoor
locations or mystical indoor spaces without specifying exact file names.
4.8. Core Mechanics and Formulas The game implements relationships between player actions and core
metrics through the PlayerStats class, which is delegated from GameState.
Reality Score represents the player’s grasp on bleak, objective reality, with an initial value of 50 and a range
from 0 to 100. High scores (2 80) indicate strong alignment with objective truth and trigger increased Gloria
intervention frequency, while low scores (s 20) suggest descent into delusion, can trigger the Cognitive
Dissonance debuff (—3 to Logic skill checks), and may force game over at 0.
Positive Energy represents attempts to impose cheerful, optimistic outlooks on the world with ironic
consequences, starting at 50 with a range from 0 to 100. High scores (= 75) trigger Gloria’s protective
interference and increased teammate “friendliness.” Critically, every increase in Positive Energy directly
contributes to world instability.
Void Entropy is a calculated floating-point value (0.0 to 1.0) representing decay of narrative coherence and
world stability, ironically accelerated by misplaced optimism. The implemented formula in PlayerStats is:

void_entropy =

positive_energy

100.0

x 0.6

r

1.0—-

reality_score

200.0

x 0.4

This formula ensures Positive Energy is the primary driver (60% weight) while reality loss contributes 40%.
The result is clamped to [0.0, 1.0] and directly influences AI prompt construction.
Entropy thresholds:
e Low entropy (< 0.3) produces normal but bleak events
¢ Medium entropy (0.3-0.7) introduces strange and unexpected elements
¢ High entropy (2 0.7) generates surreal, darkly humorous, ironic events that directly subvert recent
positive actions
The skill system implements four core skills (Logic, Perception, Composure, and Empathy), each with a base
value of 5 and a range of 0-20. Skill checks use a 1d10 roll plus skill value versus a difficulty threshold. The
Cognitive Dissonance debuff applies -3 penalty specifically to Logic checks, simulating impaired critical
thinking after Teacher Chan’s concerts or excessive Positive Energy exposure.
4.9. The Butterfly Effect Tracking System The ButterflyEffectTracker component has been implemented
to transform the game from isolated decisions into a living, interconnected narrative where every choice
creates ripples that cascade forward through time. Unlike traditional branching narratives, this creates
emergent consequences that surface scenes later, reminding players that their past decisions have lasting
weight.
The system records different types of choices (minor, major, critical) with comprehensive metadata. Each
recorded choice captures:

e Scene context (current scene number via advance scene())
e Entropy level
¢ Complete stat distributions at decision time
¢ Choice metadata, including exact text and categorical tags for filtering
Consequence seeds are stored as arrays of potential outcomes, each with a scheduled scene number (3-20
scenes ahead), description, triggered status flag, and severity rating. The system implements weighted
selection algorithms to determine when consequences trigger, with higher-severity consequences having
priority. The get context for ai() function formats relevant past choices and pending consequences for
inclusion in AI prompts, enabling the AI to reference earlier decisions and create narrative callbacks.
4.10. The Trolley Problem Dilemma System The TrolleyProblemGenerator component has been
implemented to generate dynamic moral dilemmas where every choice leads to harm, forcing players to
confront the game’s central thesis that in broken systems saturated with toxic positivity, you cannot escape
complicity. The dilemmas expose the hypocrisy of positive energy framing and institutional dysfunction.
The system implements five core template types stored as constants:
© classic - direct trolley choices
e sacrifice - choose who suffers
® complicity - action vs inaction

e lesser evil - all options catastrophically bad
® positive energy _trap - toxic positivity framing vs honest approaches
For each template, the system maintains fallback presets in both English and Chinese to ensure gameplay
continues if AI generation fails.
Trigger conditions are calculated dynamically: base 30% chance per mission after mission 3, with bonuses
(+10% for high entropy = 0.7, +15% for saturated Positive Energy = 80, +10% for low Reality < 30), capped
at maximum 85% in crisis phases.
The generate dilemma() function constructs context-aware prompts that include current stats and recent
mission summaries, then requests the AIManager to generate:
e Scenario setup
e Distinct choices with framing labels (positive/honest/neutral)
¢ Immediate stat changes
e Long-term consequence descriptions
¢ Thematic commentary
Generated dilemmas are parsed from JSON responses with robust error handling and fallback to presets.
Presentation is handled through dedicated UI overlays with dramatic visual effects:
e Screen darkening and fade-in transitions
e Full-screen scenario text with typewriter effects

10

¢ Colour-coded choice buttons (pink/warm for positive framing, blue/cool for honest, grey for neutral)
© Post-choice resolution screens

All dilemma outcomes are automatically logged to the journal system with timestamps and butterfly effect
trackers for future narrative callbacks.
4.11. The Achievement and Progress System. The Achievement System component has been
implemented with 15+ defined achievements serving three purposes:
1. Tracking player milestones and providing feedback on progression
2. Using ironic titles and descriptions to comment on player complicity
3. Encouraging replayability through hidden achievements
Implemented achievement categories include:
¢ Milestone achievements: first mission complete, first journal entry, first _dilemma _re

¢ Stat-based achievements: high reality threshold for reaching Reality = 80, low positive energy for
maintaining Positive Energy < 20 for 5 consecutive missions
¢ Skill-based achievements: logic master for passing 10 consecutive Logic checks, empathy failure for
failing 5 Empathy checks
¢ Narrative achievements with dark humour: Gloria _victim for triggering
Gloria’s intervention 3 times, prayer addict for using the Prayer System 10 times ¢ Hidden
achievements: tutorial complete, secret ending unlocked

The system connects to GameState signals (stat changed, mission completed) to automatically evaluate unlock
conditions. Achievement data persists through the save/load system with unlock timestamps for display
sorting.
4.12. The Relationship and Social Graph System. A RelationshipGraphViewer component has been
partially implemented to visualise how player choices ripple through the narrative system. The
implementation will provide a node-graph UI accessible from menus that renders butterfly effect data as a
visual network. Choice nodes (displayed on the left side in blue) connect to consequence nodes (displayed
on the right side in orange) via connection lines. The viewer implements hover effects for displaying node
details (full choice text, stats at decision time, consequence status).
The system integrates with the ButterflyEffectTracker to display recorded choices and their scheduled
consequences, providing players with a visual timeline of their decision history. While the foundational UI
and rendering logic are implemented, the planned expansion to include teammate trust levels, blame
networks, and Gloria’s favouritism metric as additional data layers remains a future development goal. The
implementation focuses on visualising the butterfly effect choice-consequence graph as the primary
relationship tracking mechanism.
4.13. Al-Driven Narrative Generation and Output Structure. All dialogue and narrative content will be
generated dynamically through integration with large language models. The system will construct contextrich prompts incorporating dynamic context, including:
¢ Current game state, such as Reality Score, Positive Energy, and Entropy Level
e¢ Recent player choices and their consequences

11

e Character relationships and trust values
¢ Mission parameters and visible symbolic assets
¢ Long-term memory from player journal entries
The Al interface will support multiple LLM backends, including:
¢ Ollama for local inference for offline play and privacy
¢* Google Gemini API for cloud-based generation with fast response times
¢ OpenRouter for multi-model routing for flexibility
¢ Mock Generator for deterministic responses for testing
Prompt engineering will include character persona prompts to ensure consistent teammate voices, such as
Gloria’s toxic positivity, Donkey’s heroic delusions, and ARK’s bureaucratic rigidity, safety filtering to prevent
inappropriate content, token usage tracking for cost control, streaming support for real-time user interface
updates, and automatic retry logic for API failures.
Output requirements will have the AI generate structured responses containing:
e Narrative text, including story beats, descriptions, and consequences
¢ Character-attributed dialogue
e Scene directives for visual composition
e Player choice options with metadata, including skill requirements and stat impacts
e Butterfly effect seeds for future consequences
This will enable emergent, replayable narratives that adapt to player decisions while maintaining thematic
consistency.
5. Testing Strategy and Evidence Plan
An extensive testing infrastructure has been implemented, comprising 20+ automated test files located in
/5.Codebase/Unit Test/, providing comprehensive coverage across all major system components. The testing
strategy employs Godot’s built-in testing framework (GUT - Godot Unit Test) with assertion-based validation.
5.1. Unit and Component Testing. Individual components have been tested in isolation to verify correct
functionality before integration. Implemented test suites include:
Core Systems Tests:
e test game state.gd (state management, game phase transitions)
¢ test player -stats.gd (stat calculation formulas, including void entropy formula verification, skill checks
with 1d10 mechanics, boundary conditions for 0-100 ranges)
¢ test gamestate integration.gd (save/load persistence, JSON serialisation integrity)
e test event bus.gd (event system, signal propagation across decoupled components)
AI System Tests:

12

¢ test Al prompt —builder.gd (context construction, note filtering by importance and tags, prompt
layering verification)
¢ test ai system.gd (provider switching between Gemini/Ollama/Mock, fallback behaviour, timeout
handling)
Testing methodology employs assertion-based validation for expected vs actual outcomes.
(assert eq, assert true, assert almost eq for floating-point comparisons), edge case coverage for boundary
conditions (reality score at 0/100, entropy at 0.0/1.0), empty inputs, and error states, and mock data
injection for deterministic testing without network dependencies.
5.2. System and Integration Testing Integration testing has been implemented to verify that components
work together correctly, ensuring smooth data flow between UI, logic, AI generation, and state management.
Critical integration points tested include:
UI and Logic Flow: Complete player interaction loops tested using test story scene modules.gd for choice selection, stat
updates via GameState delegation to PlayerStats, and UI refresh after state changes. Special event flows (Prayer System,
Gloria Intervention, Moral Dilemmas) were tested with both MockAIGenerator for deterministic outcomes and live API

calls for robustness.
AI Context and Memory Integration: test Al prompt builder.GD verifies that AIManager receives accurate
game state context (reality score, positive energy, entropy) and includes filtered notes (importance 2 3) and
butterfly effect data. Thematic appropriateness is tested by validating that prompt construction modifies
tone based on entropy thresholds (low/medium/high).
Save/Load Resilience: test save load system.gd and test gamestate integration.gd verify complete state
persistence, including mid-mission saves (preserving current mission id and scene context), butterfly effect
choice history with metadata arrays, achievement unlock timestamps, and corrupt file handling with fallback to
default state.
Performance Monitoring: Tests log AI latency and token consumption during test runs. Observed metrics
align with expectations: local Ollama responses 2-10 seconds depending on model size, cloud API (Gemini)
responses 1-5 seconds, and token consumption 500-1500 tokens per narrative generation request.
Validation criteria verified by test suites include: no UI blocking during AI generation (async/await pattern
tested), stats updating correctly after choices (signal emission verified), no memory leaks during extended
test runs (50+ simulated missions), and complete data integrity through save/load cycles (deterministic
state comparison).

13

Appendices D: Record of a meeting
Individual Project Record of a meeting 1
Meeting format

Physical

Date and time

3rd October 2025, 10:00 AM

1) Issues discussed at this meeting

- We discussed my final year project idea, which is to create a 2D game that integrates Al.
- We talked about the potential for the project's scope to become too large and the importance of focusing on a
specific, achievable goal.
- The supervisor stressed that the project requires "depth" over "breadth," meaning it's better to implement one Al

feature well rather than many superficially.
- We went over the project timeline, including the interim report in Week 7, the final report (which is 80% of the
mark), and the final presentation.

- We also briefly emphasised the need for version control and regular backups.
2) Decisions agreed at this meeting

- My main task is to refine the aims and objectives for my project to make them more focused.
- | need to prepare one main aim and four measurable objectives to discuss at our next meeting.

- Based on the refined objectives, | will draft the Project Proposal, due by the end of Week 3. This will include the
working title, aims, relevance to my degree, required resources, and a bibliography.
END

Individual Project Record of a meeting 2
Meeting format

Physical

Date and time

16th October 2025, 3:30 PM

1)

Matters to note from last meeting

My main task from the last meeting was to refine the aims and objectives for my project to make them more
focused. | have done this, and we discussed it in this meeting.

2)

Issues discussed at this meeting

1. Project Timeline Clarified
*

Coding Deadline: Hard stop in mid-February. No coding after this.

*

Testing Phase: Must happen in January/early February to allow 2-3 weeks for feedback collection and analysis

before the coding deadline.
Final Report: A solid 3 weeks at the end of Semester 2 must be dedicated solely to writing.
2. Interim Report (Week 7) - Strategy Shift

¢

This report is NOT about implementation progress.
Focus on the "thinking":
o

Context & Problem: What is the issue?

o

Literature Review: What have others done? (Crucial to expand this) o Project Specification: What is
my proposed solution?

¢

Coding progress is a minor note, not the core content.

3. The "Authentic Journey"
¢

The final report should document the real process, including problems and changes.

¢

It's a narrative of learning. Don't present a "perfect" journey.

¢

Be truthful about existing skills and what needs to be learned. This demonstrates self-awareness and risk
management.

4. Research & Literature Review
¢

Immediate Priority: Soend the next week focused on literature review.

¢

Topics: Game Design, Al in Games, Al Content Generation.

*

Sources: Use academic, reputable sources, not just code repositories. The literature should steer the project's
direction.

5. On Gathering Opinions

*

Postpone interviews with lecturers.

¢

Asking for opinions now risks derailing the project's focus.

¢

A better approach: Get their feedback on the finished game to evaluate the solution. 3) Decisions agreed at

this meeting
Before Next Meeting (Oct 23rd):
1. Literature Review: Dedicate the week to finding and reading academic articles.
2. Draft Interim Report: Start a new document focusing on the sections discussed (Lit Review, Methods,

etc.).
3. Pause Heavy Coding: Slow down implementation to focus on research and planning. END

Individual Project Record of a meeting 3
Meeting format

Physical

Date and time

24th October 2025, 3:30 PM

1) Matters to note from last meeting

Discussed the project problem area and how it integrates into the report.

Clarified that the report is not limited to 20 pages, only the appendices are.
Issues discussed at this meeting
Week 7 report not ready for review; still drafting and compiling references (around 40). Planning for each part
is done, but no content has been added yet.
Uncertainty about including a "project problem area" section in the report, especially for a game

development project.
Confirmed that the "problem" for the individual project is investigating the possibilities of LLMs to generate
dynamic, non-linear, perpetually evolving storylines for games.
Clarified that the problem area can be integrated into existing sections like "requirements analysis" and

"background," not necessarily a separate section.
Discussed how to grade the success of the LLM implementation in the game.
Discussed the inclusion of a Game Design Document (GDD) in the individual project report; it can be included

in the appendices if useful, but is not a required report itself.
Offered to share the GitHub URL with the supervisor for document storage.

2) Decisions agreed at this meeting
The "project problem area" will be integrated into the requirements analysis and background sections of the

report.
Game Design Document (GDD) can be included in the appendices of the individual project report, but it is not
considered part of the main report's word count or page limit (except for the 20-page appendix limit).
First draft of the individual project report to be sent early next week. END

Individual Project Record of a meeting 4
Meeting format

Physical

Date and time

29th October 2025 2:00 PM

1) Matters to note from last meeting
Draft interim report delivered for review, continuing to integrate the project problem area within
requirements/background sections as previously agreed.

Game Design Document being prepared as an appendix rather than a standalone submission, per prior
guidance.

2) Issues discussed at this meeting
The scope of the risk and ethics section, particularly regarding API data handling, prompt storage, and
project-specific risks.
The structure of requirements engineering content to avoid duplication with other sections.
The placement of planning documents (GDD, meeting notes) in either the report appendices or the GitHub
repository.
The word/page limits for the interim report and strategies for trimming content.

The ethical considerations of voice-input, leading to a decision for controlled UI selections.

3) Decisions agreed at this meeting
*

Revise the ethics/risk discussion to emphasise controlled UI prompts, clarify data retention/mitigation steps,
and note why voice capture is excluded.
Detailed component lists and UI descriptions will be shifted into the Game Design Document, with concise

references in the main report to manage length.
¢

Interim report will retain required proposal elements but remove duplicated material, keeping within page
limits while ensuring appendices reference supporting documents as needed.

¢

Email a Word version of the interim report draft to Dr Creed for detailed review and tracked comments.

END

Individual Project Record of a meeting 5
Date and time

6th November 2025, 3:00 PM

Meeting format

Physical

1) Matters to note from last meeting
e Interim report draft submitted for detailed review with tracked changes in Word format.
° Code refactoring in progress to improve the structure for report documentation.
e

Focus on keeping report content static and well-organised.

2) Issues discussed at this meeting
¢ Document review process: Reviewed how to view tracked changes in Word (Review > Show Comments and Track

Changes). Discussed accepting/rejecting insertions and managing document revisions.
e Extensive discussion on ethics compliance for the project
¢ Emphasis on functional testing as the methodology rather than user testing with external participants.
e Need to complete software testing with the user's compliance form.
e Ethical consideration: Cannot use external users yet due to uncertainty about inappropriate content generation from
Al.

¢ Mitigation strategy: Stop testing if Al generates inappropriate content, add safeguards, and iterate.

e Regular, thorough functional testing is required to ensure safety before any future user testing.
¢ Content reduction and refinement: Report currently 3,000 words over limit.

e Evaluation and success criteria: Discussed how to measure project success through functional testing
Future meetings: After the interim submission, move to bi-weekly meetings with one planned before Christmas
break.

END

