[Assignment 2 Final Report and Source Code]
At the end of the Spring term: The Final project report and all your source code and artefacts which are together worth 80% of your module mark are submitted at two different submission points.  The final report is a report extending your (improved) interim report addressing design and architecture of your system, implementation, testing and a self-critical evaluation. It also contains a conclusion and a bibliography.

Assignment Guidance
You should submit your final report report online via Canvas. Additionally, you are are expected to submit your entire source code via Canvas at the additional submission point. The submission site gives detailed instructions, including the formats that are acceptable.

The word limit for the final report (excluding appendices) is 10000 words. The expectation is that most reports will contain approximately 8000 words.

The submitted report should not include a full listing of your program code. Instead all your code, including the usual documentation, must be submitted electronically. The exact format is explained on the Final Year Project Canvas submission point. Note that Turnitin pdf files (for reports) are limited to 40MB on Canvas, but media files can be up to 500MB large which includes zip files. So zipping your code (directory) is recommended for submission. If you do a digital media based project (or any kind of video related project) and need even more space than 500MB, please contact your supervisor and submit on OneDrive sharing the directory with your supervisor. Note that all Sussex students can access OneDrive (e.g. via the webmail interface).  A OneDrive submission must still be accompanied by two Canvas submissions: the report and  (part of) code with a readme file explaining the  additional OneDrive submission. In any case, each student must submit electronically the following: the final report document and all code (in the sense of program code, e.g. Java, php, C, html) written by the student. Make sure that your supervisor has access to your OneDrive submission. Libraries should not be submitted but their use must be acknowledged in the report. There is no need to include code or technical documents that have not been written by you — but you must acknowledge any such material that has been used to complete the project. It may be necessary to include other appendices, but there is an expectation that these will total no more than 20 pages.

The final report should contain the following sections in the order indicated:

A cover sheet. This should contain your name, candidate number, your degree course and department, the title of the project, the name of your project supervisor and the calendar year of submission.
A signed statement of originality together with an overview of any intellectual property rights agreements that you have made. The statement of originality should be worded as follows. 'This report is submitted as part requirement for the degree of ... at the University of Sussex. It is the product of my own labour except where indicated in the text. The report may be freely copied and distributed provided the source is acknowledged. I hereby give / withhold permission for a copy of this report to be loaned out to students in future years (delete as necessary).'
Acknowledgements (optional) — this might include your supervisor(s), other students if part of a related project and any other person or organisation that has assisted in any way in the conduct of the project and its documentation.
Summary — a one page resumé of your report.
Table of contents (with page numbers).
Introduction — this should give the motivation for the project. The aims of the project should at least be stated in the first paragraph, but preferably in the first sentence. The first chapter should also explain the structure of the report.
 Professional considerations — in your interim report you will have described any ethical issues relevant to your project work, taking the BCS Code of Conduct as a starting point; in this section you should discuss how you addressed these issues. If the interim report noted that human participants would be involved but there was no need to apply for ethical approval then the completed and signed User Testing Compliance Form for UG and PGT Projects should be included in an Appendix. If the interim report identified ethical review as being necessary, it should be described here and its approval must be stated (details could be included in an Appendix). For a project that is affected only slightly by ethical issues, it is sufficient to discuss them in the introduction section. See here for more details of ethical clearance and user testing: http://www.sussex.ac.uk/ei/internal/research/researchgov
Body of report — this should include a requirements analysis and specification of the problem you have tackled. It should also include a description of how you designed, built and evaluated your system. The exact form of this will vary from project to project but it will usually occupy several chapters and will often include sections on implementation and testing (which kinds of testing?). Any software projects should include a discussion of the principles which underlie the program that has been written: the significance of its data structures, the way that its procedures and modules interact etc. A line-by-line description of your code is not the best way of achieving this and is not encouraged.You should evaluate your finished product using appropriate methods, backing up your claims with evidence. If reporting user feedback, this will be more convincing if it comes from a wider audience than just a small group of your peers (for example it could be gathered online via forums etc). Evaluation results should be related back to the original requirements. A summary of the evaluation should appear in the Conclusion section. 
Conclusion — this should include an assessment of the success of the finished product. Have you achieved your objectives? If not, why not? It should also contain suggestions for future extensions, or alternative methodologies that, with hindsight, might have led to a better system.
References — these must be given correctly. Full references with page numbers are required. If you consulted a similar project done in previous years you must reference it (using the Name (or Candidate Number) of the author, Title and Year). The references should be cited in the body of your report where appropriate. Webpages you consulted need to be listed as well. You need to add the title/topic of the Webpage and the last time you accessed it, not just the URL.
Appendices — you should include your project logs and any additional relevant system or test data as appendices. You may also include any technical material which you estimate as too detailed for the main body of the report. You should make sure that any technical material is appropriately annotated and consistently presented. The source code of your project (including documentation) must be submitted separately and should not be included in the Appendix. Also, any material that does not fit in the report's Appendix that you nevertheless deem important can be included in the source code submission. Note, however, that it is left to the markers' discretion whether they look at such extra material in the source code submission.
Marking criteria
90% – 100%: A truly outstanding project. The project outcomes (system, theory, empirical evaluation) should be essentially faultless, well-structured and carefully tested, proved or rigorously evaluated. There should be full achievement of objectives and evidence of original thought. The project objectives must be very demanding and there should be a wide range of cogently-justified project extensions. The report should be superbly organised and presented and lucidly written. The quality of the research and report should be equally high. The work should be of publishable quality in a peer-reviewed national conference.
80% – 89%: An outstanding project. The project outcomes (system, theory, empirical evaluation) should be essentially faultless, well-structured and carefully tested, proved or rigorously evaluated. There should be full achievement of demanding objectives and evidence of original thought. The report should be well organised and presented and clearly written.
70% – 79%: Students will show an understanding of all aspects of the project material, producing work without significant error or omission. Project objectives should be reasonably demanding and fully achieved. The report should display excellent organisational and presentational skills, and contain a thorough evaluation and objective critical reflection.
60% – 69%: The project should be competent in all respects. The project's primary objectives are somewhat demanding and should be substantially achieved to a reasonable standard. Students will show an understanding of the technical and professional issues involved. The presentation and organisation of the report should be clear.
50% – 59%: The project should be competent in most respects. The project objectives may not be very demanding but should be achieved to a reasonable standard. The presentation and organisation of the report should be reasonably clear. There may be some signs of weakness, but overall the grasp of the topic should be sound.
40% – 49%: The project will indicate a basic understanding of the methods to be used and how to organise and present the work in the report, but will not have gone beyond this, and there may well be signs of confusion about more complex material. There should be fair work towards the project objectives and the final report must clearly represent a development of the interim report.
30% – 39%: There should be work towards the project objectives, but significant issues are likely to be neglected. There may be significant errors or misconceptions in the project. The final report may represent little progress with respect to the interim report.
15% – 29%: The project may contain some correct and relevant material, but most issues are neglected or are covered incorrectly. There should be some signs of appreciation of the project requirements.
0% – 14%: Very little or nothing that is correct and relevant and there is no real appreciation of the project requirements.
Feedback
Feedback will be available from the School Office upon request after marking is completed.