181388
BSc Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence
Department of Informatics
An Exploration into View-Based Navigation via Temporal Difference Learning
Dr James Bennett
Professor Thomas Nowotny
2020

Statement of Originality
This report is submitted as part requirement for the degree of Computer Science &
Artificial Intelligence at the University of Sussex. It is the product of my own labour except
where indicated in the text. This work is based on a model created by Dr James Bennett,
and was developed and improved throughout the project. The report may be freely copied
and distributed provided the source is acknowledged. I hereby give permission for a copy
of this report to be loaned out to students in future years.

ii

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Dr James Bennett for his immeasurable contribution, patience and
guidance, as well as Professor Thomas Nowotny for introducing me to Dr Bennett and
supervising our project.

iii

Professional Considerations
Since this project involves scientific research based around literature and computer
modelling, there are no major ethical issues to be considered. However, having
familiarised myself with the Chartered Institute of IT’s Code of Conduct*, I can certify that
I will abide by sections 1 (Public Interest), 2 (Professional Competence and Integrity) and 3
(Duty to Relevant Authority), which are relevant to any IT project.

* Full code of conduct available at: https://www.bcs.org/membership/become-a-member/bcs-code-of-conduct/

iv

Abstract
View-based navigation (VBN) requires a form of associative learning, in which actions
must be associated with visual cues to guide an agent towards a reward or target. There
are numerous candidate brain areas in insects that may be involved in learning for VBN
tasks, one of which is the mushroom bodies (MB), a pair of structures that have been
readily studied to investigate their relation to learning and memory. Although evidence of
specific circuitry is lacking, dopamine neurons (DANs) in the MB hint at measuring
reward predictions, crucial in predicting possible outcomes. Reward predictions are
updated proportionally to reward prediction errors (RPEs), which are the differences
between predicted and received rewards. Temporal Difference (TD) learning, a form of
Reinforcement Learning, calculates TD errors, which are analogous to RPEs. Using a TD
learning model based on the Drosophila melanogaster’s MB, we test our model in a virtual
task akin to the Morris water maze, a widely used paradigm for studying learning in
rodents. One of the objectives of this project is therefore to determine how certain
components of the MB may influence learned behaviours, predicated on the hypothesis
that MBs implement TD learning. The aim of the project was threefold. First, to translate
the model from Matlab to Python, as an exercise to better understand the workings of the
model, as well as for openness (code will be made public on GitHub) and for compatibility
with other neural network simulators used in the Nowotny lab (Yavuz, Turner &
Nowotny; 2016)[1]. Secondly, to find a learning rate that ensures fast learning, comparable
to that in insects, whilst maintaining stability. Thirdly, to investigate how the discount
factor modulates learned behaviour. We found that the propensity of agents to move
towards the target depends on the extent to which they discounts future rewards. We
show that TD learning is a good match to model view-based navigation, exhibiting
comparable behaviour to Drosophila, and therefore propose experiments for researchers to
investigate the role of the discount factor in vivo.

v

Table of Contents
Statement of Originality ...........................................................................ii
Acknowledgments ..................................................................................iii
Professional Considerations ...................................................................iv
Abstract ...................................................................................................v
Table of Contents ...................................................................................vi
1 Introduction ..........................................................................................1
1.1 Associative Learning

1

1.2 The Mushroom Bodies

1

1.3 Reinforcement Learning

3

1.4 View-Based Navigation

5

2 Method .................................................................................................7
2.1 Experimental Paradigm

7

2.2 Network Set Up

9

2.2.1 Inputs and KC Sensory Representation

9

2.2.2 Connectivity and Synaptic Weights

11

2.2.3 MBON Firing Rates and Reward Prediction

12

2.2.4 Decision Making

12

2.2.5 DAN Firing Rates

13

2.2.6 Synaptic Plasticity

14

2.2.7 Eligibility Trace

14

2.2.8 KC → MBON Weight Updates

14

2.3 Model Fine Tuning

15

2.3.1 Model Translation

15

2.3.3 Stable Learning Rate

15

2.4 Performance Metrics

16

2.4.1 Direction Index

16

2.4.2 Probe Learning Index

16

3 Results ...............................................................................................18
3.1 TD Learning in a 1D Environment

18

3.2 Indications of Stable Learning

19

3.3 Searching for a Stable Learning Rate

20

3.4 An Investigation on the Role of the Discount Factor

21

4 Discussion ..........................................................................................25
vi

4.1 Overview

25

4.2 Previous MB Models

25

4.3 Model Limitations

25

4.4 Further Work

26

References ............................................................................................28
Appendices ...........................................................................................31
Appendix A

31

vii

1 Introduction
1.1 Associative Learning
To interact with its environment, an organism must develop a system capable of
accurately predicting the possible outcomes of an action to reap the largest benefits. The
organism must be able to differentiate between rewarding and punishing signals for each
action and associate the valence of each outcome with the incoming sensory cues. The
Rescorla Wagner (RW) rule[2] is a compelling theory of reward learning that illustrates how
organisms can predict rewards. Reward predictions are updated proportionally to reward
prediction errors (RPEs), which are the differences between predicted and received
rewards. RPEs are preferred to absolute rewards as a learning signal since they will
decrease as the accuracy of the prediction increases, which will add stability to the
learning process. An exciting prospect is that animal brains, specifically mammals, are
capable of implementing approximations to the RW rule[3, 4] as the dopamine neurons
(DANs) in the ventral segmental area and substantia nigra signal RPEs.

1.2 The Mushroom Bodies
The mushroom bodies (MB) (Figure 1), a pair of structures in insect brains, have
been readily studied to investigate their relation to learning and memory[5]. In Drosophila
melanogaster, DANs project onto the MB where they deliver reward signals, a key
requirement for learning cue-reward associations[6]. The MB is further innervated by the
axons of Kenyon cells (KCs), which encode visual and olfactory information, and the
dendrites of MB output neurons (MBONs), which are involved in modulating behaviour,
thus providing a means for associations between sensory cues and behaviour to be
learned. The MB is loosely split into two lobes that encode opposite valences of reward
information and actions, according to current models[7-13]. Approach behaviours are
learned by a depression at the synapses between KCs and avoidance MBONs, which is
induced by a positive reinforcement activating DANs in the protocerebral anterior medial
(PAM) cluster. Similarly, avoidance behaviours are also learned by a depression at the
synapses between KCs and approach MBONs, which is induced by negative reinforcement
1

activating DANs in the protocerebral posterior lateral 1 (PPL1) cluster. Drosophila,
therefore, can learn to associate cues to prompt approach or avoidance behaviours as a
result of the synaptic depression at KC outputs.

Figure 1 (From Bennett et al., in prep)
A 2D render of the Drosophila’s brain, comprising of several neuropils, including
the Mushroom Body (highlighted in green Labels: MB – mushroom body; AL –
antennal lobe; SOG – suboesophogeal ganglion; ME – medulla.

Currently, direct evidence of RPEs in the MB is lacking since MB DAN activity is
usually considered to signal absolute reinforcement, although several lines of indirect
evidence in support of the RPE hypothesis exist[14]. Feedforward reward signals modulate
DAN activity, however it is also known that MBONs whose axons are proximal to DAN
dendrites also deliver excitatory feedback to them[15-19]. DANs, in turn, modulate the
plasticity of KC → MBON synapses[12, 20, 21]. Since the difference between approach and
avoidance MBON firing rates scales behavioural valence, we interpret them as a reward
prediction that stimulates behaviour[11]. Therefore, by amalgamating these processes, we
notice that DANs that combine feedforward reward signals and feedback reward
predictions are capable of signalling RPEs for learning. As far as we know, most
computational models of the MB are yet to incorporate these features[22-24]. A new model
was proposed by Bennett et al.[25], which extends previous MB models by proposing that
DANs signal RPEs via feedback from MBONs. Our work is based on this model.

2

1.3 Reinforcement Learning
Machine Learning (ML) is arguably the most rapidly advancing subfield of
Artificial Intelligence (AI)*. This field can be summarised by Tom M. Mitchell’s formal
definition:

“A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T
and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves
with experience E[26]"
ML can be expressed in three main learning paradigms: Supervised Learning,
Unsupervised Learning and Reinforcement Learning[27] (RL). To implement our model we
shall focus on the latter.
RL does not require labelled data or sub-optimal actions to be explicitly corrected.
Instead, RL strikes a balance between exploration (by performing new actions) and
exploitation (by using its acquired knowledge of positively rewarding actions) through
sparse rewarding events. A domain of RL, known as temporal-difference (TD) learning, is
particularly attractive for our study, since this algorithm was inspired by behavioural data
on how animals learn predictions[28]. In its standard form, TD learning consists of an agent
interacting with its environment by choosing appropriate actions to transition through
states. The agent receives rewards based on its chosen actions and resulting states, leading
the agent to base its decision making on maximising its received reward. The name TD
comes from the fact that the agent uses differences in predictions over time steps to drive
the learning process. Montague, Dayan & Sejnowski (1996)[29] were the first to propose a
framework that demonstrated how dopamine systems could signal information about
future expectations. Schultz, Dayan & Montague (1997)[3] showed how the TD error (more
about this in the ‘Method’ section) concept from RL accounts for many features of the
phasic activity of DANs in mammals. Several models have already been implemented in
an attempt to further the physiological basis of reward-based learning, such as Frémaux,

* According to Google Trends, which tracks the popularity of search terms, ML searches are close to out-pacing AI

searches

3

Sprekeler & Gerstner’s (2013)[30] continuous time actor-critic framework with spiking
neurons. The authors propose model architectures that have similar properties to those
observed in the hippocampus place cells[31], but are otherwise not further constrained by
anatomical details. The goal was to create a model as simple and general as possible for an
actor-critic architecture, and not to map it to a particular brain structure. They do,
however, propose a network architecture that could implement TD learning, and explain
its relevance to navigational tasks. Rao & Sejnowski (2001)[32] showed how spike-timingdependent plasticity[33] could be interpreted as a form of TD learning for prediction, by
creating a model based on a previous study that demonstrated the ability to reproduce a
range of cortical response properties[34]. In our work, we deliberately constrain our model
to the anatomical details of the MB, so as to make testable predictions for a specific model
organism.
Bennett et al. (2019) used the Rescorla-Wagner learning rule, and investigated the
hypothesis that the Drosophila’s MB implement this rule. However, there are limitations to
the RW learning rule, such as the ‘secondary conditioning’[35] paradigm which, in
behavioural psychology, is used to describe the following associative learning paradigm:

s1 → r | s2 → s1 | s2 → ‘r’
Here, s1 and s2 are stimuli, r is the reward and ‘r’ is the expected reward. This
involves one stimulus becoming associated with a reward, then a second stimulus to be
associated with the first stimulus, resulting in the second stimulus to evoke expectation of
the reward even though it was never directly paired with the reward. The RW rule cannot
account for this secondary conditioning, since there is no reward during the s2 → s1
training.
A solution to this problem is TD learning, since the prediction of future rewards can
be used as rewards themselves, therefore acting as secondary reinforcers. Although the
specific circuity for implementing it are lacking, the DANs in the MB hint at the capability
to incorporate this learning rule[36]. In this new version of the Drosophila model, we
implement TD(λ) learning, which incorporates eligibility traces (ETs) with standard TD
4

learning. The TD learning algorithm only updates the immediately preceding reward
prediction, but since the prediction in the current time step also provides valuable
information for multiple preceding predictions, it is useful to update these preceding
predictions as well. While the weight vectors act as a form of long-term memory, ETs acts
more as a form of short-term memory, by remembering a number of previous input signals
and enabling the weights associated with these signals to be updated in the current time
step. The discount factor determines the strength of future rewards predictions in the
current prediction, and if we are able to observe concrete differences in learning as the
discount factor varies, we can make a strong prediction that experimenters can test. By
targeting specific synapses, we would expect the behaviour of the real flies to change like
our model. We are interested in what this would mean for the actual biological system.

1.4 View-Based Navigation
Drosophila have been studied in the context of visual associative learning, for
example Schnaitmann et al.[37] explored a new paradigm for classical conditioning, where
flies were trained en masse to associate one of two cues (blue and green light) to appetitive
or aversive reward. Results demonstrated that a group of flies that received appetitive
reward when approaching the green light during training showed a notably higher
preference for the green stimulus during testing compared to a group of flies that received
the same reward when approaching the blue light.
View-based navigation (VBN) requires a more complex form of associative learning,
in which visual cues must somehow be associated with actions that move an agent
towards a reward, even though the cues and reward may not co-occur. VBN in insects is a
well studied topic, with extensive research being done on ants[38] and bees[39]. However,
there is comparatively little literature on visual navigation in Drosophila melanogaster, not to
mention the neural underpinnings of visual navigation in any insect. A very recent study
by Stern et al.[40] demonstrates that MB play a role in promoting spatial learning after
observing that learning was reduced when MB were ablated.
Ofstad et al.[41] looked at VBN in Drosophila by developing a thermal-visual arena
inspired by the Morris water maze, which is a widely used paradigm for studying
5

learning in rodents[42]. The objective is for the flies to locate a concealed ‘safe’ tile that is
cooler than the rest of the arena. The safe tile constitutes a positively reinforced location in
comparison to the other aversive locations. Furthermore, there are no cues in the
environment that a priori reveal the exact location of the ‘safe’ tile, meaning the agents
must learn its location through experience in the arena. Surrounding the arena is a circular
LED display with three different patterns, which enables the agent to learn about the
location of the ‘safe’ tile relative to the environment’s visual cues (Figure 2a). Ofstad et al.’s
results show that over the course of several training trials, the flies drastically reduce their
path length and time to reach the safe tile, which demonstrates learning (Figure 2b-e), all
the while maintaining a constant speed (Figure 2f), showing the decreased time it took
them to find the reward was not due to an increase in speed. Flies tested in the dark
showed no improvement over time, suggesting it was the circular LED display that
enabled the flies to perform VBN.

Figure 2 (From Ofstad et al., 2011)
a) An illustration of the arena used for the experiment.Three different patterns were displayed on the circular LEDs to provide visual cues
to the flies. The flies’ movements were recorded using a camera under infrared (IR) illumination.
b) Top: Diagrammatic representation of the arena and its visual landscape, the location of the ‘safe’ tile from the previous trial (dashed
square) and the new location of the ‘safe’ tile (blue square). The location of the ‘safe’ tile remains constant in relative terms to the visual
panorama even though the absolute position in subsequent trials is shifted.
Bottom: Trajectories of 4 different flies across trials 1, 2 and 10.
c, d, e, f) Flies were trained with a coupled visual panorama (red; n = 33 experiments, 495 flies), an uncoupled visual panorama (grey; n =
21 experiments, 315 flies) or in the dark (black; n = 23 experiments, 345 flies)

6

2 Method
2.1 Experimental Paradigm
We mimic the experimental setup of Ofstad et al.’s study, which was described in
the previous section (1.4). The objective of our agent is the same as theirs, to locate a ‘safe’
cool tile (positive reward - value attributed is Rc = 10 ) amidst a hot arena (negative
reward - value attributed is Rh = 0.01 ). Our arena is square shaped into a 20 by 20 grid,
making it a discrete location space. To most closely match Ofstad et al.’s experimental set
up, we place our agent near the centre of the upper left quadrant (Q1) and the reward in
the adjacent upper right quadrant (Q2) with a width of 1/8 of the arena size (Figure 3).
Q1

Q2

Q4

Q3

Figure 3 Simulation Arena Set Up
The arena set up for our simulation. The agent starts at
position y = 5, x = 5 in Q1 (red), while the reward (blue)
is located at y = 4 : 6, x = 14 : 16 in Q2

Through a sequence of trials, Ntr , the naive agent is free to explore the arena in
search of the reward. Each location outside the reward bears a small negative reward,
capturing the energy expended by the flies to keep cool. Thus, in order to maximise
reward, the agent must learn, over successive trials, to accurately predict the estimated
reward from a specific location to lead it most efficiently to the reward location. To best
match our simulations to the experiments, we computed the number of time steps per
trial, Nt , based on the following intuition. Given the walking speed of flies in Ofstad et al.,

Vof , the diameter of the arena, Dof , in unites of tiles, and the trial duration, Tof , a fly
should be able to walk the diameter of the arena N times. Therefore, given a walking
7

speed, Vm , of 1 tile per time step in our model, and an arena width of Wm, in units of tiles,
we need to compute the number of time steps needed for our agent to walk the width of
the arena N times. For Ofstad et al., we calculate Nof as:

Nof =

Dof ⋅ Sof
Vof ⋅ Tof

,

(1)

where Sof is the size of tiles in millimetres. In our model, we calculated Nm as:

Wm ⋅ Sm
Vm ⋅ Nt
W
= m,
Nt

Nm =

(2)

where Sm is the size of tiles, Sm = 1 and Vm = 1 since our agent moves by one tile in

each time step. Setting Nof = Nm , and substituting eq. 1 into eq. 2, we get:

Dof ⋅ Sof
Vof ⋅ Tof

=

Wm
Nt

Nt = Wm ⋅

(3)

Vof ⋅ Tof
Sof ⋅ Dof

,

where Nt is the number of time steps per trial in our model.

Since we are implementing the backward view of TD learning (more on this in
section 2.2.5, ‘DAN Firing Rates’), at least two time points are needed before weights can
be updated using the TD in reward predictions. Therefore, each trial is made up of an
initial time step followed by a maximum of Nt − 1 subsequent time steps during which the
agent searches for the reward. The trial is terminated upon the agent encountering the
reward. Below is pseudocode for how our model runs:

8

for each trial:
if t = 1:
calculateFiringRates(MBON)
chooseAction()
updatedLocation()
resetEligibilityTrace()
updateEligibilityTrace()
while t <= Nt and not rewardFound:
update(rewardFound)
calculateFiringRates(MBON)
calculateFiringRates(DAN)
updateWeights(KC → MBON)
chooseAction()
updatedLocation()
updateEligibilityTrace()
increment(t)

Note that t denotes a time step in a trial, and the update(rewardFound) takes place at
the start of the time step, since we are implementing the backward view of TD learning
and require the additional step to calculate the prediction error of the previous state.

2.2 Network Set Up
A schematic of the model developed for this experiment is presented in Figure 4. In
this section we will expand on how the network is set up and initialised.

2.2.1 Inputs and KC Sensory Representation
The inputs of KCs are mainly projection neurons from the antennal lobe and optic
lobes. These inputs carry olfactory and visual information, and alongside recurrent
inhibition from the anterior paired lateral neuron, elicit a sparse representation of sensory
information in around 5-10% of KCs[43-45]. For simplicity, and since much less is known
about the visual representations in Drosophila as opposed to olfactory representations, our
9

model implements a one-to-one mapping of KCs, simply referred to as K in our model, to
discrete locations, since we assume different scenes elicit different responses in Ks.
Adjacent locations provide similar views of the environment, therefore correlations are
induced between Ks by filtering each K's spatial response profile with a Gaussian kernel
with σ = 1 and amplitude = 10/ (2πσ 2 ) . Therefore, the location dependence of the
firing rate for a given K, j , which is governed by the 2D Gaussian centred on xj and yj is
given by:

G(x, y) = A exp −
( (

(x − xj )2 + (y − yj )2
2σ 2

))

,

(4)

where A is the amplitude.

Figure 4 (Adapted from Bennett et al., in prep)
A schematic representation of the model of the Drosophila’s MB, which implements temporal difference learning to perform view-based navigation in
a simulated arena. The model is split into two parts, the actor and the critic. The sensory cue received at a specific location elicits a response in a
subset of KCs, which in turn drive responses in the approach (M+) and avoidance (M-) MBONS (the critic neurons). These excite the same-valence
DANs, as well as the inhibitory interneuron (grey) synapsing onto the opposite-valence DAN. Critic MBONs encode reinforcement predictions (RPs),
which are fed back to DANs via delayed and non-delayed synapses. Delayed feedback has the opposite sign to non-delayed feedback, enabling
DANs to compute the temporal difference in RPs. Critic MBONs, as well as the subset of KCs activated by the sensory cue and the reward signal
determine the DANs’ firing rate. In turn, DANs calculate the TD error and modulate Ks’ weights onto the critic MBONs and the actor MBONs
(through LTP and LTD). The four actor MBONs (red stars) represent the four directions our agents can move in (down, left, up or right). These can fire
positively for approach behaviour or negatively for avoidance behaviour. for simplicity, we do not rectify the firing rates of actor MBONs. As such,
negative firing rates in one actor MBON (for example M_left) is equivalent to positive firing rates in another actor MBON (M_right).The actor part of
our model is less biologically realistic, since organisms drive behaviour through complex motor circuits. Here, our actor neurons are hypothetical
neurons that drive behaviour.

10

2.2.2 Connectivity and Synaptic Weights
KC → MBON
Ks are responsible for the sensory input in our model. Sensory information is
channeled from the Ks, of which there are Nk , through excitatory feedforward synapses to
two separate MBONs. The appetitive value neurons, M+c , and aversive value neurons, M−c ,
play the role of the critic, while the action neurons, M a , representing the 4 directions of
movement (down, left, up and right), play the role of the actor. For simplicity, to
differentiate between positive and negative valences, we use the subscript + for positive
valence (approach MBONs are therefore M+c ) and the subscript - for negative valence
(avoidance MBONs are therefore M−c ). For the different directions, we use subscript d for
down, subscript u for up, and so on (actor MBON for downwards direction is therefore

Mda). Ki synapses onto M±c and M a with a synaptic weights w±i and wai respectively, which
are initialised with w±i = 0.1ξ±i and wai = 0.1ξai for each initial time step in a trial, where

ξ±i and ξai are uniform random variables in the range 0-1. For simplicity, the KC → M a
synaptic weights can go negative (for avoidance), as well as the M a firing rates. Since these
actor neurons are not thought to exist in the MB, but rather downstream of the MB, we do
not model them with biological plausibility in mind.

KC → DAN
Ks drive excitatory responses in DANs, D± in our model. Therefore, Ki drives D±
through fixed excitatory synapses with weights wK = ϕ1 , where 1 = [1, 1, …, 1]T is a
vector of ones of length Nk , superscript T denotes the transpose and ϕ is a constant that
sets the synaptic weight from KCs to DANs. Throughout this text, vectors are denoted by
bold fonts.

MBON → DAN
MBONS provide excitatory feedback to their respective DANs[16-18]. M±c , the critic
MBONS in our model, synapse onto D± with a unit synaptic weight. Therefore, we simply
describe the feedback weight as wm = 1, and specify if the input is excitatory or inhibitory
in the firing rates equations (eqs. 9 & 10).
11

2.2.3 MBON Firing Rates and Reward Prediction
Our model implements two sets of MBONs. M±c neurons are modelled as linearnonlinear (LN) units that output a firing rate, y , equal to the rectified linear sum of their
inputs, x:

y=f

(∑
j

wj xj ,
)

(5)

where f (z) = max(0, z) is the rectifying nonlinearity. Eq. 5 can be written more
succinct in vector notation: y = f (w T x) , where w T = [w1, …, wn] for n presynaptic
neurons. M a are modelled similarly, but since they can go negative they are not passed
through the rectifying nonlinearity function.
At the start of each trial, the MBON firing rates, and thus reward predictions, are
calculated for the current location. The firing rate, m±c , of MBON M± , signals the associated
reward (positive or negative) to a given cue, labeled i, according to:

m±ci = f (wT±ki) ,

(6)

where ki is the vector of KC responses to stimulus i , associated with the sensory

representation of being in a particular state, and w± are plastic, excitatory synaptic

weights. The net reward predicted by sensory cue i is then determined by m̂ ci = m+ci − m−ci.
The firing rate, md,a l, u, r , for the actor MBONs is the same as eq. 6 but once again without
being passed through the rectifying nonlinearity function.

2.2.4 Decision Making
In each trial, reward predictions for all available actions are compared, and the
model is forced to choose an action. Decisions are made probabilistically using a softmax
function, p[A] , which specifies the probability of choosing action, A , as a function of the

M a firing rate, m a, as:

p[a] =

exp(βmAa)

N
a)
∑A′A=1 exp(βmA′

12

,

(7)

where β is a constant and determines the variability of the agent’s actions and plays
a large role in the exploration-exploitation dilemma and possible actions are down, left, up
or right. A small β will favour exploration, whereas a large β will favour exploitation. The
selected action is ultimately determined on a given trial by drawing a single, random
sample, ξ , from a uniform distribution in the range of 0-1, and obeying the following
principle:

A = max

{

x∈ℕ

x

∑
i=1

p(A) ≤ ξ, 1 ≤ x ≤ 4 ,
}

(8)

2.2.5 DAN Firing Rates
Once an action has been taken, the reward prediction specific to the resulting state
and previous state is fed back to the DANs where they are compared to the net reward,

r ̂(t) = r (t)+ − r (t)− , received in that time step t, where r (t)+ is positive reinforcement and
r (t)− is negative reinforcement. Given the resulting state, D± firing rates are given by:

d(t)± = f (wk(k) ∓ wm(m+c (t − 1) − m−c (t − 1)) ±
̂
,
γ wm(m+c (t) − m−c (t)) ± r(t))

(9)

where wm are the MBON → DANs weight vectors, m+ the firing rates of the

appetitive neurons and m− the aversive neurons, which can be written more concisely as:

̂
d(t)± = f (wk(k) ∓ wm m̂ c(t − 1) ± γ wm m̂ c(t) ± r(t))
,

(10)

where m̂ c(t − 1) is the reward prediction from previous state, m̂ c(t) is the reward
prediction for the current state.
The TD error from TD learning is calculated by:

δt−1 =· Rt + γV(St ) − V(St−1) ,

(11)

where Rt is the reward in the current time step, γ denotes the discount factor, V is an

estimate of the true state value function and S(t) is the state at time t in which the agent

finds itself. Here we show the TD error in its backward view, since our agent can only rely
on its current knowledge of the environment. Therefore, eq. 11’s estimated state value,

V(St ), is analogous to our model’s wm(m̂ c(t)). The state values in our model are the reward
predictions, given by the difference in M+c and M−c firing rates. Thus, our DAN firing rates
implement the TD error.
13

2.2.6 Synaptic Plasticity
In this work, we assume the MB’s objective is to create accurate reward predictions
by minimising TD errors. The plasticity rule, P±RPE , is then defined by the negative
gradient:

P±RPE = ηk(d± − d∓) ,

(12)

where η is the learning rate.

2.2.7 Eligibility Trace
Eligibility traces, E , are a way of improving the performance of TD learning by
producing a computationally efficient algorithmic mechanism to provide short-term
memory for a system by storing a single vector rather than a list of vectors. Explicitly, ET is
a function of state E(s) and encode a decaying memory of the states visited (a low pass
filtered version of the KC firing rates). As mentioned in section 2.2.5, we implement the
backward view of TD learning, since the forward view requires future events or rewards
which are not available at the current time. We initialise E as a (Nk , 1) vector, where Nk is
the number of KCs. E is updated at each time step as:

E(t + 1) = λE(t) +

k(t)
,
τ

(13)

τ is the timescale over which E decays and λ = 1 − (1/τ), the factor that iteratively
decays E on each time step. E is reset to zero at the beginning of each trial.

2.2.8 KC → MBON Weight Updates
After computing the TD error in the DANs, the KC → MBON weights are updated
for the critic MBON by:

w±(t) = f (w±(t − 1) + P±RPE (t) ⋅ E(t)T ) ,

(14)

and the actor MBON by:

wa(t) = wa(t − 1) + P±RPE (t) ⋅ E(t)T

14

(15)

2.3 Model Fine Tuning
2.3.1 Model Translation
The first major task of this project consisted in translating Bennett’s model, written
in MatLab, into Python. This was done for several reasons, including my preference for the
Python language, as an exercise to better understand the workings of the model, for
openness (code will be made public on GitHub) and for further uses (eg. GeNN
compatibility). This process took longer than expected, but helped to expose and remove
bugs, as well as streamline the code making it easier for others to take on, in addition to
moving closer to making it publicly accessible.

2.3.3 Stable Learning Rate
Before beginning our investigation on the discount factor’s effect on learning, we
had to find a suitable learning rate. In Ofstad et al.’s study, Drosophila show substantial
improvements in task performance within 10 trials. We therefore sought a learning rate
that allows similarly rapid learning without destabilising the synaptic weight dynamics.
This was done by searching for the fastest stable learning rate, η, when the discount factor,

γ, was equal to 1. By measuring an estimate of the variability in state values, m̂ c , we can
assess the stability of the synaptic weight dynamics between trials. This variability for a
given learning rate was calculated as:

1 100
σ=
(m̂ c(t = 0, tr) − μ̄)2
,
⟨⟨ 90 ∑
⟩ ⟩
𝒳 N
tr=11

(16)

a

where μ̄ is the average of m̂ c over the chosen range of trials, 𝒳 denotes the set of

tiles where y = 5 and 5 ⩽ x ⩽ 13 (ie. the optimal path from starting position to reward),
and Na represents the number of unique agents. The fastest our agent could learn was
around 10 trials, during which the state values are expected to change substantially. We
therefore analyse state values between trials 11 and 100 in order to assess the stability of
learning.

15

2.4 Performance Metrics
We borrow several performance metrics from Ofstad et al., including the direction
index and probe learning index (detailed below), as well as the path length, which we
measure as the number of time steps needed to reach the reward (since our agent updates
its position each time step).

2.4.1 Direction Index
In order to measure the propensity of an agent to navigate towards the target
throughout learning, we compute a direction index, DI, according to:

DI =

NQ2 − NQ4
Na

,

(17)

where NQ2 is the number of agents entering Q2, in which the reward is located, and

similarly for NQ4 , where Q4 is the opposite quadrant to Q2 . Na is the number of unique
agents in the simulation.

2.4.2 Probe Learning Index
As an additional test of visual place memory, Ofstad et al. define the probe trial,
which takes place after training and where the reward is removed. The flies, therefore,
roam around the arena in search of the now non-existent cool tile. This allows for a
measure of the flies’ bias to search the area close to where they have learnt the reward
should be located. The probe learning index (PLI) in Ofstad et al. is calculated by:

PLI =

TQ2 − TQ4

TQ2 + TQ4

,

(18)

where TQ2 is the time spent in Q2, and similarly for TQ4, during the first 60 seconds
after leaving Q1 (the quadrant in which the agent begins). This way of calculating the PLI
did not transfer well to our experiment, as our agents would too often spend all of their
time in Q2 or all of it in Q4, which resulted in the PLI being uninformative. Seeking a more
uniformly distributed PLI, we chose instead to measure the mean distance, μd , from the
centre of both quadrants, to then calculate the PLI as:

PLI =

μd from Q4c − μd from Q2c
,
μd from Q4c + μd from Q2c
16

(19)

where the subscript c denotes the centre of the quadrant. The difference in
distribution between Ofstad et al.’s version of the PLI and our version (Figure 5) shows
that our method transfers well to our model by providing a better distribution and
therefore will provide a better understanding of how the discount factor affects learning.

a

b

Figure 5 - Distribution of the Two Versions of the Probe Learning Index
A: The distribution of the PLI using Ofstad et al.’s method (eq. 14). B: The distribution of the PLI using our method (eq. 15). Using our version, we
obtain a better distributed result, which gives a better indication of the propensity of our agents to search the reward quadrant instead of the
adjacent quadrant during the probe trial after the training period.
Parameters for this experiment: γ = 1, η = 2 * 10−3, Na = 400, Ntr = 10

17

3 Results
In this section, we present the results of our investigations. First, we demonstrate
our model works as expected by forcing our agent to move across a simple 1D
environment and plotting the state values and TD error. Then, we test our model in the
main experimental paradigm described in section 2.1. We show the trajectories of several
agents (simulated separately) searching for the reward in different trials, the state values
changing over trials and the state value map as a way to demonstrate learning. Next, we
search for the fastest stable learning rate before investigating the role of the discount factor
in modulating behaviour.

3.1 TD Learning in a 1D Environment
As a proof of principle, we implemented a simple 1D experimental paradigm. The
agent is forced to move to the right along the track until reaching the reward in the final
state, over multiple trials. Figure 6a shows that the state value rises when the reward is
first encountered (dark blue lines) in the state preceding the reward location and gradually
increases to approach the actual reward (Rc = 10) over trials. This reward is propagated
through previously encountered states, and since future rewards are discounted, a gradual
decay is visible. Figure 6b shows that in the early trials, the dopamine neurons signal the
TD error when it reaches the reward. This signal gets propagated through previously
encountered states (location corresponds to time since the agent is forced to move to the
right in each time step) to the initial starting position.

a

b

Figure 6 - TD Learning in a 1D Environment
Proof of principle demonstrating TD learning taking place in our model. The agent begins in a null state (no KC activity) before being
forced to move to the right along the track, until obtaining a positive reward in the terminal state. A: Shows the progression of state
values over trials. Each coloured line shows the value function represented by the critic neurons’ activity against trials (from dark blue in
trial 1 to dark red in trial 40). B: Shows the progression of TD error over trials. Each coloured line shows the TD error represented by the
DANs activity against trials.
Parameters for this experiment: γ = 0.9, η = 2 * 10−3, Ntr = 40

18

3.2 Indications of Stable Learning
Figure 7 presents several indices of stable learning in our main experimental
paradigm. As a reminder, the agent begins in the upper left quadrant (Q1) and must find
the reward tile in the upper right quadrant (Q2) to obtain a reward. In Figure 7a, we show
several agents’ trajectories (simulated separately) across trials, demonstrating a significant
improvement in locating the reward more rapidly. The state values along the optimal path
(Figure 7b) show increasingly greater values as the agent approaches the reward, as well
as seemingly starting to level out after 100 trials, presumably as they get closer to their true
value. Finally, the action and state value map (Figure 7c) displays the agents’ propensity to
move towards the reward (action values) and associate high values to the optimal path
(state values).

a

b

c

Figure 7 - Indications of Stable Learning
In arena plots, the red square indicates the starting position and the blue square indicates the reward location. A: Trajectories of 10 agents from trials 1,
10 and 20. Over trials, the agents find more direct paths to the reward. B: State values over 100 trials along the optimal path (straight line to the right
from starting position to reward). The colour indicates the location of the tile in terms of its distance from the reward. The state values begin to level out
after 100 trials, seemingly approaching their true value. Values shown are mean across 400 agents. C: Action and state value map of an agent after 100
trials superimposed. Red arrows indicate the preferred direction of movement for the actor neurons at each location (the longer the arrow, the stronger
the action value). The grayscale plot underneath shows the state values. A corridor of high state values demonstrates the learnt optimal route to the
reward. Parameters for this experiment: γ = 1, η = 2.25 * 10−2

19

3.3 Searching for a Stable Learning Rate
As explained in section 2.3.3, we wanted to find the fastest stable learning rate to
mimic fast learning in insects. We use eq. 16 to assess the stability of a particular learning
rate and show the results in Figure 8. At lower learning rates, the standard deviation, σ ,
rises progressively due to the weight updates increasing as the learning rate increases from
zero before levelling out, presumably because the state values are approaching their true
value. The σ then increases again as a result of increasingly unstable learning. To reduce

the chances of running into unstable regimes, we selected η = 2.25 * 10−2 , which is used
in all simulations hereafter. Showing the state values across trials (Figure 8c) shows slow
stabilisation when η = 1.0 * 10−2 , better stabilisation when η = 2.25 * 10−2

and

−2

increasingly large values when η = 3.0 * 10 .

a

b

c
η = 0.01

η = 0.03

η = 0.0225

Figure 8 - Standard Deviation of State Values across Learning Rates
To find a fast yet stable learning rate, we calculated the standard deviation of state values across a selection of learning rates. A low learning rate meant
a better stabilisation of the weights, an indication of more stable learning. A: Shows the standard deviation on a large scale of learning rates. When
η > 0.0275, the standard deviation of state values starts growing rapidly, a sign of instability. The red rectangle shows the cut in for B: the standard
deviation on a reduced scale to show our chosen learning rate (circled in red) at η = 0.0225. C: Examples of how the state values evolve for different
learning rates, η = 0.01 (slow), η = 0.0225 (our chosen learning rate) and η = 0.03 (unstable). Furthermore, the state values do not stabilise with our
chosen value of η, this is because at lower learning rates, the state values take longer to stabilise. When the learning rate becomes unstable (η = 0.03),
we can see the state values growing rapidly instead of stabilising. Therefore there is a tradeoff between rapid learning and stable learning.
Parameters for this experiment: Na = 400, Ntr = 100, γ = 1

20

3.4 An Investigation on the Role of the Discount Factor
One of our objectives was to investigate how the discount factor, γ , modulates

learned behaviour. To do this, we look at how γ affects various learning indices such as the
path length (PL), the discount factor (DI) and the probe learning index (PLI) (described in

section 2.4). To illustrate the agent’s estimate of a state’s value, we show the state values as
a function of location along the optimal path from the starting position to the target, over
trials, and for the 6 discount factors we are investigating (Figure 9). Similarly to Figure 6a,
the reward is propagated through previously encountered states, and since future rewards
are discounted, a gradual decay is visible - except for when γ = 1 , we can see the state
values after 100 trials are flattening out, since future rewards are not discounted. Figure 10
shows the state value maps for different discount factors, providing another way of
visualising the effect of the discount factor on agents’ estimated state values. It shows the
state values growing away from the reward towards the starting position as the discount
factor increases.
Figure 11 presents our results for the learning indices. Across all discount factors,
the agents learn to significantly reduce their path length to the reward (Figure 11a). At
higher discounts (γ ≥ 0.8), agents almost exclusively travel along the optimal path after
less than 50 trials. At lower discounts, future reward predictions are given less importance
in the current reward prediction, therefore agents cannot propagate backwards the high
reward predictions associated with states in close proximity of the reward back to their
starting position. This results in agents exhibiting more sinuous trajectories to locate the
reward as the discount factor decreases. The direction index, similarly to the path length, is
affected by the discount factor (Figure 11b). At higher discounts (γ ≥ 0.8), agents almost
exclusively enter Q2 rather than Q4 after less than 50 trials. As with the path length, a
lower discount prohibits high reward predictions to reach the states in proximity of the
starting position, therefore the propensity for the agent to enter Q2 rather than Q4 is
weaker. The probe learning index is also dependent on the discount factor (Figure 11c).
Higher discounts lead to a higher PLI and smaller interquartile range (IQR). This can once
again be related back to agents with lower discount factors having less accurate reward
predictions further away from the reward, leading to more exploratory behaviour, as
shown by the lower median and larger IQR. As expected, a higher value of γ results in
quicker learning (fast reduction in PL and increase in DI) and better performance (PL and
DI reach optimal values, PLI is higher and narrower) since high reward predictions travel
back to the starting location.

21

Figure 9 - State Values as a Function of Location
State values as a function of location (y = 5, x = 5 : 13, optimal path from starting position to target) over trials for different discount factors. Similarly to
Figure 5, the reward is propagated through previously encountered states, and since future rewards are discounted, a gradual decay is visible. When the
discount factor is 1, the reward is propagated further back, resulting in a stabilisation around the maximum state value, noticeable as the increments
between trials get smaller. As the discount factor decreases, less of the reward is propagated backwards, resulting in a steeper gradient away from the
reward location. Values shown are mean across 400 agents. Parameters for this experiment: Na = 400, Ntr = 100, η = 2.25 * 10−2

22

Figure 10 - State Value Map for Various Discount Factors
Another way of visualising how the discount factor influences estimated state values. As the discount factor increases, the reward is propagated further
through previously encountered states, showing a gradual increase in the state values from the reward back towards the starting position. When the
discount factor is 1, the reward is propagated further back, resulting in a stabilisation around the maximum state value, noticeable as the increments
between trials get smaller. As the discount factor decreases, less of the reward is propagated backwards, resulting in a steeper gradient away from the
reward location. Values shown are mean across 400 agents. Parameters for this experiment: Na = 400, Ntr = 100, η = 2.25 * 10−2

23

a

b

c

Figure 11 - Path Length, Direction
Index and Probe Learning Index
A: Path length (measured as the number
of tiles visited to reach target) over 100
trials for different discount factors. The red
line indicates the shortest path (9 tiles)
between start location and reward.
B: Direction Index (DI) over 100 trials for
different discount factors. The red line
indicates the optimal DI of 1.0, meaning
all agents entered Q2 first instead of Q4.
C: Probe Learning Index for different
discount factors. Box plots indicate the
median value (orange line), 25th and 75th
percentiles (box), the data range
(whiskers), and outliers (circles).
See methods for details of calculation.
Values shown in A & B are mean ± s.e.m.
Parameters for this figure:

Na = 400, Ntr = 100, η = 2.25 * 10−2

24

4 Discussion
4.1 Overview
This project consisted of three main objectives. Firstly, to translate our model from
Matlab to Python to better understand the model and its workings, as well as for openness
and for compatibility with other neural network simulators used in the Nowotny lab.
Although this took longer than expected, it enabled us to fix various bugs as well as
improve and further the functionality of the model (such as removing redundancy and
creating more complex experimental paradigms - more in section 4.4). Secondly, to find a
learning rate that ensures fast learning, comparable to that in insects, whilst maintaining
stability. This was done by measuring the variability in state values. Thirdly, to explore
how learned behaviour is modulated by the discount factor. We demonstrated that TD
learning could successfully be applied to a view-based navigation task, exhibiting
behaviour comparable to Drosophila. Learning seems to take place in two phases, fast
learning between trials 1 to 30, and slow learning from 30 trials and onwards. Learning
indices in both phases seems to be dependent on the discount factor, suggesting the
propensity of agents to move towards the reward depends on the extent to which it
discounts future rewards. Thus, the learning indices used in Ofstad et al. provide a
behavioural means of probing the discount factor in Drosophila.

4.2 Previous MB Models
The model developed for this work sits apart from previous MB models[22-24] since it
doesn’t utilise bounded synapses that prevent reward predictions from growing
continuously with sustained reward experience. Bounded synapses preclude the models
from, given sufficient training, differentiating between two rewards of the same valency
but of different magnitudes. Our model, instead, incorporates feedback from MBONs to
DANs, which enables KC → MBON synapses to accurately and stably encode the reward
magnitude when the RPE signalled by DANs reduces to zero.

4.3 Model Limitations
A key assumption embedded in this work is that the MB’s objective is singular: to
minimise RPEs. However, in reality, an organism has to satisfy numerous objectives to
survive. In Drosophila, anatomically segregated DANs in the γ-lobe encode rewards such as
water and sugar, as well as motor activity[9, 10, 20, 46], indicating Drosophila can indeed learn
to satisfy different objectives. Multi-objective optimisation is a difficult problem, and goes
25

beyond the scope of this project. Nonetheless, the concept that accurate predictions
support decision making is still applicable to many objectives.
Furthermore, our use of a Gaussian kernel to induce correlations between states
would not work in non open-arena spaces, such as mazes or other bounded spaces. In our
model, a Gaussian kernel is an appropriate method to induce correlations between states,
since the virtual arena is open and unobstructed. The spatial structure of correlations is
therefore uniform around a specific state. However, in more complex settings, such as a
maze made up of walls, two locations may be adjacent but elicit very different sensory
representations if they are on different sides of the wall.

4.4 Further Work
There are several further line of inquiries that can stem from this work. A deeper
investigation on how Drosophila discount future rewards, under the assumption they
implement TD learning, could be done by searching for a proxy for state values. This
could provide additional behavioural means to probe the discount factor in vivo. A
possible candidate could be an extended version of the direction index. By dividing the
arena into smaller subsections (e.g. 8x8 instead of 2x2), and computing a direction index
for each tile in the grid, you could calculate a finer scale version of the direction index. For
each subsection, the first quadrant the agent enters becomes Q1, and Q2 the quadrant
closest to the reward. This extended direction index would have the advantage of being
easily transferable to in vivo experimental designs.
Foucaud et al. (2010)[47] implemented a heat-maze experimental paradigm similar to
Ofstad et al. They created an algorithm to classify search strategies into different categories
such as thigmotaxis, where flies exhibit a strong propensity to explore in close proximity of
the arena walls, random search, where flies explore most of the arena surface, scanning,
where flies mainly explore the centre of the arena and directed search, where flies mainly
explore in a corridor between the starting position and the reward location. Now that our
model has been shown to work, developing a similar classification algorithm to apply to
our model would yield additional indices to analyse behaviour and learning patterns.
Additional work on the experimental paradigm could include adding obstacles for
the agents to learn a more complex route to reach the reward (See appendix A for
preliminary results using our current model). In more complex experimental paradigms
including walls, it is possible that optimal performance will require a discount factor less
than 1. With γ = 1, one may find that agents are willing to cross the wall (negative reward)
in order to reach the positive reward on the other side. Additionally, developing a 3D
virtual arena could allow for an experimental paradigm that better aligns with that of
Ofstad et al.’s, by creating more realistic correlations between adjacent states.
26

Ultimately, by developing biologically plausible neural networks and studying
agents behaviour in various experimental paradigms, we can yield predictions that can be
tested using existing experimental protocols, for example experimenting with discounting
in the Drosophila MB by optogenetically stimulating* neurons or by silencing certain
weights between the feedback neurons and comparing the elicited behaviour to our
model’s. This is an exciting prospect, as it can help elucidate the precise neural
underpinnings required for view-based navigation which will lead to a better
understanding of the general organisation and implementation of spatial memories in
Drosophila and beyond.

* optogenetic stimulation is a technique that uses light to control genetically modified neurons expressing light-sensitive

ion channels

27

References
1.

Yavuz, E., J. Turner, and T. Nowotny, GeNN: a code generation framework for

accelerated brain simulations. Scientific reports, 2016. 6: p. 18854.
2.

Rescorla, R.A. and A.R. Wagner, A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in

the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory, 1972. 2: p. 64-99.
3.

Schultz, W., P. Dayan, and P.R. Montague, A neural substrate of prediction and reward.

Science, 1997. 275(5306): p. 1593-1599.
4.

Schultz, W., Neuronal reward and decision signals: from theories to data.

Physiological reviews, 2015. 95(3): p. 853-951.
5.

Waddell, S. and W.G. Quinn, What can we teach Drosophila? What can they teach

us? Trends Genet, 2001. 17(12): p. 719-26.
6.

Waddell, S., Reinforcement signalling in Drosophila; dopamine does it all after all.

Current opinion in neurobiology, 2013. 23(3): p. 324-329.
7.

Schwaerzel, M., et al., Dopamine and octopamine differentiate between aversive

and appetitive olfactory memories in Drosophila. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003. 23(33): p.
10495-10502.
8.

Mao, Z. and R.L. Davis, Eight different types of dopaminergic neurons innervate

the Drosophila mushroom body neuropil: anatomical and physiological heterogeneity.
Frontiers in neural circuits, 2009. 3: p. 5.
9.

Burke, C.J., et al., Layered reward signalling through octopamine and dopamine in

Drosophila. Nature, 2012. 492(7429): p. 433-437.
10.

Liu, C., et al., A subset of dopamine neurons signals reward for odour memory in

Drosophila. Nature, 2012. 488(7412): p. 512-516.
11.

Aso, Y., et al., Mushroom body output neurons encode valence and guide memory-

based action selection in Drosophila. Elife, 2014. 3: p. e04580.
12.

Owald, D., et al., Activity of defined mushroom body output neurons underlies

learned olfactory behavior in Drosophila. Neuron, 2015. 86(2): p. 417-427.
13.

Perisse, E., et al., Aversive learning and appetitive motivation toggle feed-forward

inhibition in the Drosophila mushroom body. Neuron, 2016. 90(5): p. 1086-1099.
14.

Perisse, E., et al., Different kenyon cell populations drive learned approach and

avoidance in Drosophila. Neuron, 2013. 79(5): p. 945-56.
15.

Aso, Y., et al., The neuronal architecture of the mushroom body provides a logic for

associative learning. elife, 2014. 3: p. e04577.
16.

Ichinose, T., et al., Reward signal in a recurrent circuit drives appetitive long-term

memory formation. Elife, 2015. 4: p. e10719.
28

17.

Felsenberg, J., et al., Re-evaluation of learned information in Drosophila. Nature,

2017. 544(7649): p. 240-244.
18.

Felsenberg, J., et al., Integration of parallel opposing memories underlies memory

extinction. Cell, 2018. 175(3): p. 709-722. e15.
19.

Zhao, X., et al., Persistent activity in a recurrent circuit underlies courtship memory

in Drosophila. Elife, 2018. 7: p. e31425.
20.

Cohn, R., I. Morantte, and V. Ruta, Coordinated and compartmentalized

neuromodulation shapes sensory processing in Drosophila. Cell, 2015. 163(7): p. 1742-1755.
21.

Hige, T., et al., Heterosynaptic plasticity underlies aversive olfactory learning in

Drosophila. Neuron, 2015. 88(5): p. 985-998.
22.

Bazhenov, M., R. Huerta, and B.H. Smith, A computational framework for

understanding decision making through integration of basic learning rules. Journal of
Neuroscience, 2013. 33(13): p. 5686-5697.
23.

Peng, F. and L. Chittka, A simple computational model of the bee mushroom body

can explain seemingly complex forms of olfactory learning and memory. Current Biology,
2017. 27(2): p. 224-230.
24.

Cope, A.J., et al., Abstract concept learning in a simple neural network inspired by

the insect brain. PLoS computational biology, 2018. 14(9): p. e1006435.
25.

Bennett, J.E.M., A. Philippides, and T. Nowotny, Learning with reward prediction

errors in a model of the <em>Drosophila</em> mushroom body. bioRxiv, 2019: p. 776401.
26.

Mitchell, T.M., Machine learning. 1997, McGraw-hill New York.

27.

Sutton, R.S. and A.G. Barto, Reinforcement learning : an introduction. Second edition.

ed. Adaptive computation and machine learning. 2018, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The
MIT Press. xxii, 526 pages.
28.

Sutton, R., Learning to Predict by the Method of Temporal Differences. Machine

Learning, 1988. 3: p. 9-44.
29.

Montague, P., P. Dayan, and T. Sejnowski, A framework for mesencephalic

dopamine systems based on predictive Hebbian learning. The Journal of Neuroscience,
1996. 16(5): p. 1936-1947.
30.

Frémaux, N., H. Sprekeler, and W. Gerstner, Reinforcement learning using a

continuous time actor-critic framework with spiking neurons. PLoS computational
biology, 2013. 9(4).
31.

O'Keefe, J. and J. Dostrovsky, The hippocampus as a spatial map: preliminary

evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain research, 1971.
32.

Rao, R.P. and T.J. Sejnowski, Spike-timing-dependent Hebbian plasticity as

temporal difference learning. Neural computation, 2001. 13(10): p. 2221-2237.
33.

Sejnowski, T.J., The book of Hebb. Neuron, 1999. 24(4): p. 773-776.
29

34.

Mainen, Z.F. and T.J. Sejnowski, Influence of dendritic structure on firing pattern in

model neocortical neurons. Nature, 1996. 382(6589): p. 363-366.
35.

Pavlov, I.P., Conditioned reflexes, translated by GV Anrep. London: Oxford, 1927.

36.

Dylla, K.V., et al., Trace conditioning in Drosophila induces associative plasticity in

mushroom body Kenyon cells and dopaminergic neurons. Frontiers in neural circuits,
2017. 11: p. 42.
37.

Schnaitmann, C., et al., Appetitive and aversive visual learning in freely moving

Drosophila. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 2010. 4(10).
38.

Graham, P. and T.S. Collett, View-based navigation in insects: how wood ants

(Formica rufa L.) look at and are guided by extended landmarks. J Exp Biol, 2002. 205(Pt
16): p. 2499-509.
39.

Menzel, R., et al., The knowledge base of bee navigation. The Journal of Experimental

Biology, 1996. 199(1): p. 141-146.
40.

Stern, U., et al., Learning a Spatial Task by Trial and Error in Drosophila. Curr Biol,

2019. 29(15): p. 2517-2525.e5.
41.

Ofstad, T.A., C.S. Zuker, and M.B. Reiser, Visual place learning in Drosophila

melanogaster. Nature, 2011. 474(7350): p. 204-7.
42.

Morris, R.G., Spatial localization does not require the presence of local cues.

Learning and motivation, 1981. 12(2): p. 239-260.
43.

Wang, Y., et al., Stereotyped odor-evoked activity in the mushroom body of

Drosophila revealed by green fluorescent protein-based Ca2+ imaging. Journal of
Neuroscience, 2004. 24(29): p. 6507-6514.
44.

Turner, G.C., M. Bazhenov, and G. Laurent, Olfactory representations by Drosophila

mushroom body neurons. Journal of neurophysiology, 2008. 99(2): p. 734-746.
45.

Lin, A.C., et al., Sparse, decorrelated odor coding in the mushroom body enhances

learned odor discrimination. Nature neuroscience, 2014. 17(4): p. 559-568.
46.

Lin, S., et al., Neural correlates of water reward in thirsty Drosophila. Nature

neuroscience, 2014. 17(11): p. 1536-1542.
47.

Foucaud, J., J.G. Burns, and F. Mery, Use of spatial information and search strategies

in a water maze analog in Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS One, 2010. 5(12).

30

Appendices
Appendix A

a

b

Appendix A - Learning To Avoid Obstacles
In arena plots, the red square indicates the starting position, blue square indicates the reward location (Rb = 10) and the green rectangle represents the
obstacle, assigned a strong negative reward (Rg = − 50). A: State-value map after 100 trials shows convergence in state values for tiles on the optimal

route to the reward, whilst learning about the strong negative reward in the centre of the arena. B: Trajectories of 10 agents from trials 1, 10 and 30. Over
trials, the agents find more direct paths to the reward, while avoiding the obstacle (Since this obstacle is represented only by a strong negative reward,
agents can still choose to go through it, as seen in the first trial as they explore). Parameters for this experiment: δ = 1, η = 2.25 * 10−2

31

